 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Outcome is related to the extent and duration of lead exposure . Effects of lead on the physiology of the kidneys and blood are generally reversible ; its effects on the central nervous system are not . While peripheral effects in adults often go away when lead exposure ceases , evidence suggests that most of lead 's effects on a child 's central nervous system are irreversible . Children with lead poisoning may thus have adverse health , cognitive , and behavioral effects that follow them into adulthood . 
 = = = Encephalopathy = = = 
 Lead encephalopathy is a medical emergency and causes permanent brain damage in 70 – 80 % of children affected by it , even those that receive the best treatment . The mortality rate for people who develop cerebral involvement is about 25 % , and of those who survive who had lead encephalopathy symptoms by the time chelation therapy was begun , about 40 % have permanent neurological problems such as cerebral palsy . 
 = = = Long @-@ term = = = 
 Exposure to lead may also decrease lifespan and have health effects in the long term . Death rates from a variety of causes have been found to be higher in people with elevated blood lead levels ; these include cancer , stroke , and heart disease , and general death rates from all causes . Lead is considered a possible human carcinogen based on evidence from animal studies . Evidence also suggests that age @-@ related mental decline and psychiatric symptoms are correlated with lead exposure . Cumulative exposure over a prolonged period may have a more important effect on some aspects of health than recent exposure . Some health effects , such as high blood pressure , are only significant risks when lead exposure is prolonged ( over about one year ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Lead poisoning was among the first known and most widely studied work and environmental hazards . One of the first metals to be smelted and used , lead is thought to have been discovered and first mined in Anatolia around 6500 BCE . Its density , workability , and corrosion @-@ resistance were among the metal 's attractions . 
 In the 2nd century BCE the Greek botanist Nicander described the colic and paralysis seen in lead @-@ poisoned people . Dioscorides , a Greek physician who lived in the 1st century CE , wrote that lead makes the mind " give way " . 
 Lead was used extensively in Roman aqueducts from about 500 BCE to 300 CE Julius Caesar 's engineer , Vitruvius , reported , " water is much more wholesome from earthenware pipes than from lead pipes . For it seems to be made injurious by lead , because white lead is produced by it , and this is said to be harmful to the human body . " Gout , prevalent in affluent Rome , is thought to be the result of lead , or leaded eating and drinking vessels . Sugar of lead ( lead ( II ) acetate ) was used to sweeten wine , and the gout that resulted from this was known as " saturnine " gout . It is even hypothesized that lead poisoning may have contributed to the decline of the Roman Empire , a hypothesis thoroughly disputed : 
 The great disadvantage of lead has always been that it is poisonous . This was fully recognised by the ancients , and Vitruvius specifically warns against its use . Because it was nevertheless used in profusion for carrying drinking water , the conclusion has often been drawn that the Romans must therefore have suffered from lead poisoning ; sometimes conclusions are carried even further and it is inferred that this caused infertility and other unwelcome conditions , and that lead plumbing was largely responsible for the decline and fall of Rome . 
 Two things make this otherwise attractive hypothesis impossible . First , the calcium carbonate deposit that formed so thickly inside the aqueduct channels also formed inside the pipes , effectively insulating the water from the lead , so that the two never touched . Second , because the Romans had so few taps and the water was constantly running , it was never inside the pipes for more than a few minutes , and certainly not long enough to become contaminated . 
 However , recent research supports the idea that the lead found in the water came from the supply pipes , rather than another source of contamination . It was not unknown for locals to punch holes in the pipes to draw water off , increasing the number of people exposed to the lead . 
 Thirty years ago , Jerome Nriagu argued in a milestone paper that Roman civilization collapsed as a result of lead poisoning . Clair Patterson , the scientist who convinced governments to ban lead from gasoline , enthusiastically endorsed this idea , which nevertheless triggered a volley of publications aimed at refuting it . Although today lead is no longer seen as the prime culprit of Rome ’ s demise , its status in the system of water distribution by lead pipes ( <unk> ) still stands as a major public health issue . By measuring Pb isotope compositions of sediments from the Tiber River and the Trajanic Harbor , the present work shows that “ tap water ” from ancient Rome had 100 times more lead than local spring waters . 
 Romans also consumed lead through the consumption of <unk> , <unk> , and sapa , <unk> made by boiling down fruit in lead cookware . <unk> and its relatives were used in Ancient Roman cuisine and cosmetics , including as a food preservative . The use of leaden cookware , though popular , was not the general standard and copper cookware was used far more generally . There is also no indication how often sapa was added or in what quantity . 
 The consumption of sapa as having a role in the fall of the Roman Empire was used in a theory proposed by geochemist Jerome Nriagu to state that " lead poisoning contributed to the decline of the Roman Empire " . John Scarborough , a pharmacologist and classicist , criticized the conclusions drawn by Nriagu 's book as " so full of false evidence , <unk> , typographical errors , and a blatant flippancy regarding primary sources that the reader cannot trust the basic arguments . " 
 After antiquity , mention of lead poisoning was absent from medical literature until the end of the Middle Ages . In 1656 the German physician Samuel Stockhausen recognized dust and fumes containing lead compounds as the cause of disease , called since ancient Roman times <unk> <unk> , that were known to afflict miners , smelter workers , potters , and others whose work exposed them to the metal . 
 The painter Caravaggio might have died of lead poisoning . Bones with high lead levels were recently found in a grave thought likely to be his . Paints used at the time contained high amounts of lead salts . Caravaggio is known to have exhibited violent behavior , as caused by lead poisoning . 
 In 17th @-@ century Germany , the physician Eberhard <unk> discovered lead @-@ contaminated wine to be the cause of an epidemic of colic . He had noticed that monks who did not drink wine were healthy , while wine drinkers developed colic , and traced the cause to sugar of lead , made by simmering <unk> with vinegar . As a result , Eberhard Ludwig , Duke of Württemberg issued an edict in 1696 banning the adulteration of wines with <unk> . 
 In the 18th century lead poisoning was fairly frequent on account of the widespread drinking of rum , which was made in stills with a lead component ( the " worm " ) . It was a significant cause of mortality amongst slaves and sailors in the colonial West Indies . Lead poisoning from rum was also noted in Boston . Benjamin Franklin suspected lead to be a risk in 1786 . Also in the 18th century , " Devonshire colic " was the name given to the symptoms suffered by people of Devon who drank cider made in presses that were lined with lead . Lead was added to cheap wine illegally in the 18th and early 19th centuries as a sweetener . The composer Beethoven , a heavy wine drinker , suffered elevated lead levels ( as later detected in his hair ) possibly due to this ; the cause of his death is controversial , but lead poisoning is a contender as a factor . 
 With the Industrial Revolution in the 19th century , lead poisoning became common in the work setting . The introduction of lead paint for residential use in the 19th century increased childhood exposure to lead ; for millennia before this , most lead exposure had been occupational . An important step in the understanding of childhood lead poisoning occurred when toxicity in children from lead paint was recognized in Australia in 1897 . France , Belgium , and Austria banned white lead interior paints in 1909 ; the League of Nations followed suit in 1922 . However , in the United States , laws banning lead house paint were not passed until 1971 , and it was phased out and not fully banned until 1978 . 
 The 20th century saw an increase in worldwide lead exposure levels due to the increased widespread use of the metal . Beginning in the 1920s , lead was added to gasoline to improve its combustion ; lead from this exhaust persists today in soil and dust in buildings . Blood lead levels worldwide have been declining sharply since the 1980s , when leaded gasoline began to be phased out . In those countries that have banned lead in solder for food and drink cans and have banned leaded gasoline additives , blood lead levels have fallen sharply since the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 The levels found today in most people are orders of magnitude greater than those of pre @-@ industrial society . Due to reductions of lead in products and the workplace , acute lead poisoning is rare in most countries today , but low level lead exposure is still common . It was not until the second half of the 20th century that subclinical lead exposure became understood to be a problem . During the end of the 20th century , the blood lead levels deemed acceptable steadily declined . Blood lead levels once considered safe are now considered hazardous , with no known safe threshold . 
 In the 1980s Herbert Needleman was falsely accused of scientific misconduct by the Lead Industry Associates . 
 In 2002 Tommy Thompson , secretary of Health and Human Services appointed at least two persons with conflicts of interest to the CDC 's Lead Advisory Committee . 
 In 2014 a case by the state of California against a number of companies decided against Sherwin @-@ Williams NL Industries and ConAgra and required them to pay $ 1 @.@ 15 billion . 
 Studies have found a weak link between lead from leaded gasoline and crime rates . 
 = = Other species = = 
 Humans are not alone in suffering from lead 's effects ; plants and animals are also affected by lead toxicity to varying degrees depending on species . Animals experience many of the same effects of lead exposure as humans do , such as abdominal pain , peripheral neuropathy , and behavioral changes such as increased aggression . Much of what is known about human lead toxicity and its effects is derived from animal studies . Animals are used to test the effects of treatments , such as chelating agents , and to provide information on the pathophysiology of lead , such as how it is absorbed and distributed in the body . 
 Farm animals such as cows and horses as well as pet animals are also susceptible to the effects of lead toxicity . Sources of lead exposure in pets can be the same as those that present health threats to humans sharing the environment , such as paint and blinds , and there is sometimes lead in toys made for pets . Lead poisoning in a pet dog may indicate that children in the same household are at increased risk for elevated lead levels . 
 = = = Wildlife = = = 
 Lead , one of the leading causes of toxicity in waterfowl , has been known to cause die @-@ offs of wild bird populations . When hunters use lead shot , waterfowl such as ducks can ingest the spent pellets later and be poisoned ; predators that eat these birds are also at risk . Lead shot @-@ related waterfowl poisonings were first documented in the US in the 1880s . By 1919 , the spent lead pellets from waterfowl hunting was positively identified as the source of waterfowl deaths . Lead shot has been banned for hunting waterfowl in several countries , including the US in 1991 and Canada in 1997 . Other threats to wildlife include lead paint , sediment from lead mines and smelters , and lead weights from fishing lines . Lead in some fishing gear has been banned in several countries . 
 The critically endangered California condor has also been affected by lead poisoning . As scavengers , condors eat carcasses of game that have been shot but not retrieved , and with them the fragments from lead bullets ; this increases their lead levels . Among condors around the Grand Canyon , lead poisoning due to eating lead shot is the most frequently diagnosed cause of death . In an effort to protect this species , in areas designated as the California condor 's range the use of projectiles containing lead has been banned to hunt deer , feral pigs , elk , pronghorn antelope , coyotes , ground squirrels , and other non @-@ game wildlife . Also , conservation programs exist which routinely capture condors , check their blood lead levels , and treat cases of poisoning . 
 = Final Fantasy V = 
 Final Fantasy V ( <unk> , Fainaru Fantajī Faibu ) is a medieval @-@ fantasy role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square ( now Square Enix ) in 1992 as a part of the Final Fantasy series . The game first appeared only in Japan on Nintendo 's Super Famicom ( known internationally as the Super Nintendo Entertainment System ) . It has been ported with minor differences to Sony 's PlayStation and Nintendo 's Game Boy Advance . An original video animation produced in 1994 called Final Fantasy : Legend of the Crystals serves as a sequel to the events depicted in the game . It was released for the PlayStation Network on April 6 , 2011 in Japan . An enhanced port of the game , with new high resolution graphics and a touch @-@ based interface , was released for iPhone and iPad on March 28 , 2013 , and for Android on September 25 , 2013 . 
 The game begins as a wanderer named Bartz investigates a fallen meteor . There , he encounters several characters , one of whom reveals the danger facing the four Crystals that control the world 's elements . These Crystals act as a seal on Exdeath , an evil sorcerer . Bartz and his party must keep the Crystals from being exploited by Exdeath 's influence and prevent his resurgence . 
 Final Fantasy V has been praised for the freedom of customization that the player has over the characters , achieved through the greatly expanded Job System . Despite being released only in Japan , the Super Famicom version sold more than two million copies . The PlayStation version has earned " Greatest Hits " status , selling more than 350 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Final Fantasy V includes many standard role @-@ playing elements as well as renovated features introduced in earlier Final Fantasy games . Players navigate from a top @-@ down perspective ; a traversable overworld connects the various towns , dungeons , and other points of interest . The player can traverse the overworld by foot , Chocobo , hydra @-@ guided ship , wind drake , or airship , depending on the situation . Most towns contain scattered inns for resting , shops for purchasing equipment , and people from whom the player can gain information . The player may also embark on several side quests that become available as the story progresses . Characters grow in strength by gaining experience points from random encounters with monsters on the overworld or in a dungeon . Experience culminates in a " level up " , in which character attributes such as hit points and magic power increase . A menu @-@ based management system allows the player to equip , heal , and change each character 's selected job outside of battle as well as to save the game 's progress . 
 Final Fantasy V is the second Final Fantasy game to use the Active Time Battle ( ATB ) system , in which time flows continuously for both the player and enemies during combat . This system was first established in Final Fantasy IV , but in that game there was no way to visibly anticipate which character 's turn would come up next . In Final Fantasy V , the player can see which playable character 's turn is next in battle , in the form of a time gauge — or " ATB Bar " — which fills according to a character 's speed . When the selected character 's turn arrives , the player can execute one of several commands , such as attacking the enemy with an equipped weapon , using a special ability or item , or changing the character 's row position . The ATB mechanic with a gauge , as seen in Final Fantasy V , would be used in the four following main titles in the series and remains a staple mechanic of the franchise . 
 = = = Job System = = = 
 The main feature of the gameplay of Final Fantasy V is the Job System . Players can freely select jobs ( also called " classes " ) for their characters to master , allowing each character to gain special abilities and potentially master all 22 jobs ( 26 in the Game Boy Advance version ) . Each character begins with only the " Freelancer " class ; to gain access to new jobs , players must acquire crystal shards . This system is an improved version of the one in Final Fantasy III ; several older jobs were either reused or revamped for Final Fantasy V , such as the Black Mage and Thief . The game also introduces several classes to the series , including the Blue Mage , Time Mage , and Mime . Each of these classes has been featured in numerous Final Fantasy installments since . 
 Once the player gains access to the job system , characters begin to earn a separate form of experience — Ability Points — in conjunction with regular experience points . Characters gain job levels after accumulating AP ; as with regular levels , the required amount of experience increases after each job level . AP and job levels do not transfer from class to class . As job levels increase , new skills become available for the character to use in a new form of customization ; characters learn job @-@ specific abilities that may be transferred to a new job . For example , a character with the Knight job who has also earned job levels as a Black Mage may set Black Magic as a secondary command , enabling both Black Mage and Knight abilities in battle . The nature of these abilities varies ; while some serve as special commands in battle , others may be innate to the class or activated automatically when conditions are met , such as the Thief 's " Caution " skill , which prevents rear attacks from enemies . This system allows for deeper customization of characters . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The backstory of Final Fantasy V is revealed in phases through cutscenes and interactions with non @-@ playable characters . One millennium before the events of the main story , a powerful mage named Enuo imperiled the world using the power of an evil entity called the " Void " . The people retaliated by using twelve legendary weapons to vanquish Enuo ; however , the Void itself could not be destroyed . Consequently , the people split the world 's four elemental Crystals into two sets , effectively creating two worlds . The Void then became sealed in a dimensional cleft between the two worlds . 
 Nearly a thousand years passed without incident , and both worlds prospered due to the powers of their Crystals of Wind , Water , Fire , and Earth . New kingdoms and towns flourished , and travel by ship acted as a critical means of commerce and communication . However , a sinister force was stirring in the second world — ever since the Void incident , malicious demons had been sealed inside a tree in the Great Forest of Moore . The corrupted amalgamation of spirits emerged as Exdeath , the game 's primary antagonist . When Exdeath attempted to claim the world for himself , a group of heroes called the " Four Warriors of Dawn " ( Galuf , Xezat , <unk> , and <unk> ) sealed him within the first world using its Crystals , and peace returned for another thirty years . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Final Fantasy V features five player characters , though only four of which are playable at a given time . Bartz <unk> is a traveling adventurer who becomes involved in the story when he investigates the site of a meteorite strike . Lenna Charlotte Tycoon is a princess of Tycoon who follows her father to investigate the Wind Shrine 's Crystal . Early on , Bartz finds her unconscious and saves her from goblins . Galuf Doe is a mysterious old man who was discovered unconscious near the meteorite with a case of amnesia . Faris <unk> is a pirate captain who captures Bartz , Lenna , and Galuf when they try to steal her ship ; she is revealed to be <unk> <unk> Tycoon in disguise . Krile Mayer <unk> is the granddaughter of Galuf who journeys with him to the planet and receives his abilities . 
 Most of the main characters were involved with or related to the original Four Warriors of Dawn , such as <unk> <unk> ( Bartz 's father ) , <unk> <unk> , and Xezat Matias <unk> ; Galuf was the fourth warrior . The game also contains several supporting characters , including engineer Cid <unk> , his grandson Mid <unk> , and turtle sage <unk> . One of Exdeath 's henchmen , Gilgamesh , is a recurring mini @-@ boss in the second half of the game . Gilgamesh has also appeared in newer Final Fantasy titles , such as Final Fantasy VIII , Final Fantasy IX , Final Fantasy XII , Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 as downloadable content , and Final Fantasy XIV : A Realm Reborn . Concept art for the characters was designed by Yoshitaka Amano ; he has offered such artwork for every main Final Fantasy installment since the original . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Final Fantasy V begins on a day when the world 's wind currents begin to slow and stale . Deeply troubled by this occurrence , the king of Tycoon makes ready to travel to the Wind Shrine on the back of his drake , quelling the worries of his daughter , Princess Lenna . Upon arriving at the Shrine , the king bears witness to the Wind Crystal shattering before his eyes . 
 Meanwhile , a young traveller named Bartz , resting in the woods near Tycoon , witnesses a meteorite plunge to the planet 's surface just outside the castle . Bartz promptly investigates , discovering Lenna lying unconscious from attack . After rescuing her , they discover an old man in the debris with partial amnesia named Galuf . Lenna explains that she had been on her way to the Wind Shrine after her father . Galuf suddenly recalls that it was his original destination as well , opting to accompany her . Though the trio part ways , Bartz soon encounters Lenna and Galuf again assaulted by monsters in a quaking valley . The three travel together , finding all land routes blockaded by the upheavals caused by the meteorite 's fall . Exploring an underground cavern , they encounter a den of pirates and their leader , Faris . With the help of the pirate captain , the group makes its way to the Wind Shrine to discover the shattered Crystal , but no sign of the missing king . The shards react to their presence , however , and an image of Tycoon appears , explaining to them that they must protect those Crystals that yet remain . 
 Eventually , the party comes to discover that the Crystals formed a seal upon Exdeath , an ancient sorcerer ; with them destroyed , not only would the dark essence be released , but over time the planet itself would become uninhabitable . The party attempts to save the crystals of Water , Fire , and Earth ; but by the machinations of human folly or the influence of the sealed Exdeath , they fail . Having been freed , Exdeath defeats the party and returns to his homeworld . Galuf 's granddaughter Krile arrives by meteorite , restoring Galuf 's memory completely ; he recalls he originated from the same world as Exdeath , pursuing him back home with Krile . Bartz and the others resolve that the fight is not Galuf 's alone , together traveling to the distant planet world , where Exdeath is already wreaking havoc in pursuit of that world 's Crystals . The trio is captured , but Galuf rescues them and defeats Exdeath 's lieutenant , Gilgamesh , in the process . They are blown to a distant continent when a magical barrier is activated during their escape , but make their way to Bal Castle , Galuf 's kingdom . 
 The party meets Xezat , one of Galuf 's companions and a former Warrior of Dawn , and learn that Bartz 's father was part of their group . Joining forces , they deactivate the barrier around Exdeath 's castle , but at the cost of Xezat 's life . They then learn of Exdeath 's origins , traveling to the Guardian Tree to dispel the seals . Exdeath anticipates the party 's actions and torches Moore Forest , ensnaring the group . Krile arrives to help , but is herself trapped by the warlock 's powers . At the sight of his granddaughter 's capture , Galuf frees himself and battles Exdeath to the point of death , refusing to fall until the creature flees . <unk> from his wounds , Galuf dies despite the party 's efforts to save him , imparting his abilities to Krile . The party pursues Exdeath to his tower and defeats him , but the remaining Crystals shatter and the worlds are reunited . 
 For a time , it seems Exdeath has been truly destroyed , and the party celebrates in Tycoon . Bartz , however , is contacted by the sage <unk> . Meeting with him , a thorn suddenly leaps from Krile 's palm , manifesting as Exdeath , now resurrected and fully in command of the Void . With it , he removes entire towns and kingdoms from existence , tossing them into a tear in reality . 
 Fortunately for the party , the reunification of worlds has opened the pathways to ancient sites where weapons and powers used to quell Enuo 's rise a thousand years past lay in wait . So armed , the party enters the Rift , seeking out Exdeath at the center of the inter @-@ dimensional nexus where they , too , fall prey to the Void . With help from their fallen allies , the party survives and is returned before Exdeath , now manifested as a demonic sylvan , battling him until he weakens and is swallowed by his own power . He then transforms into Neo Exdeath , intent on destroying the very essence of reality , himself with it . Exdeath is ultimately defeated , and , using the power of the Crystal shards , the heroes seal the Void once more and restore the reunified world and its Crystals . The game 's ending varies based on how many party members are still alive at Neo Exdeath 's defeat , detailing the events after the world 's resurrection . At the end , the remaining group visits the Guardian Tree , and find that the fallen party members have returned to life . 
 = = Development = = 
 Final Fantasy V was directed by Final Fantasy series creator Hironobu Sakaguchi who , prior to the release of Final Fantasy IX , called it his favorite Final Fantasy game . The character , image , and title logo designs were created by series illustrator and image designer Yoshitaka Amano , while the actual character sprites were designed by Kazuko Shibuya . The monsters were designed by Tetsuya Nomura . Amano has stated that he counts his depictions of both Faris from Final Fantasy V and Terra from Final Fantasy VI among his favorite Final Fantasy designs . The writing of the scenario text was a collaborative effort between Sakaguchi and Yoshinori Kitase . Sakaguchi conceived the plot and was in charge of it , while Kitase tried to include more humor to lighten up the relatively serious story . The Job System was designed by Hiroyuki Ito , who worked on the game as a battle planner alongside Akihiko Matsui . Mode 7 effects were used in the airship sequences , which moving in the airship would cause the planet to rotate on its axis . In total , Square employed a team of 45 people to create the game , and 16 <unk> of space were used to accommodate for the sprites , animations , and detailed background . According to GamePro in a May 1993 issue , the Japanese authorities had asked Square not to release the game during a school day because schoolchildren would skip class to wait in line for the game . 
 The official English translation of Final Fantasy V began shortly after the release of the Japanese version . The game was to be titled " Final Fantasy III " in North America , but the project fell through . Square then announced that due to its differing tone and much higher difficulty from the rest of the series , they would be releasing it in North America as a standalone game with a yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ determined title , rather than part of the Final Fantasy series . This plan was quickly aborted . Translator Ted Woolsey explained in a 1994 interview , " [ Final Fantasy V is ] just not accessible enough to the average gamer " . Rumors circulated that a second attempt at localization would be made and that the game would be titled Final Fantasy Extreme , but this attempt was also canceled . A third attempt was made to port the game to Microsoft Windows @-@ based personal computers for North American release by developer Top Dog Software , but this was canceled . Another attempt to port the game to Windows for North America was " handled by Eidos Interactive " circa 1998 ( but it is unclear whether this is the same version Top Dog Software was working on or an actual fourth attempt ) . The continual canceling of the localization angered fans and led to Final Fantasy V becoming one of the first games to receive a complete fan translation . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The game 's soundtrack was composed by Nobuo Uematsu and consists of 56 tracks . A two @-@ disc album was released alongside the game totaling 67 tracks . Uematsu had originally calculated that the game would require more than 100 pieces of music , but he managed to reduce the number to 56 . The song " Dear Friends " would become the title piece in the 2004 concert tour Dear Friends -Music from Final Fantasy- , chosen to reflect Uematsu 's appreciation for his music 's worldwide fan support . The song " Clash on the Big Bridge " would later be arranged by Hitoshi Sakimoto for the Final Fantasy XII Original Soundtrack in 2006 . 
 The album Final Fantasy V : 5 + 1 was released in 1992 and contained five songs from the original score as well as a previously unreleased Super Famicom version of " Matoya 's Cave " from the original 1987 Final Fantasy for the Nintendo Entertainment System . A collection of arranged tracks , Final Fantasy V Dear Friends ; a 13 @-@ track disc , Piano Collections Final Fantasy V ; and a short series of remixes , Final Fantasy V : Mambo de Chocobo , were all released in 1993 . Finally , many of the original songs were included on the North American Final Fantasy Anthology Soundtrack , together with the two @-@ game compilation . 
 = = Ports and remakes = = 
 Final Fantasy V was ported by Tose to the Sony PlayStation and re @-@ released in Japan on March 19 , 1998 ; it was included in the 1999 release of Final Fantasy Collection , alongside Final Fantasy IV and Final Fantasy VI . The PlayStation version boasted two new full motion video opening and ending sequences and a " memo @-@ save " feature , but the game otherwise remained unchanged . Square released 50 @,@ 000 limited edition copies of the collection which included a Final Fantasy @-@ themed alarm clock . In the same year , Square released the PlayStation compilation Final Fantasy Anthology in North America , which included Final Fantasy V , as well as the PlayStation version of Final Fantasy VI . This would mark the first time the game was published outside Japan , nearly seven years after its initial release . In 2002 , Square released this version of the game in Europe and Australia , this time alongside Final Fantasy IV . The English version of the game received changes from its original format — most notably , Faris was given a Cornish " pirate " accent and there was a different interpretation of character names , such as the names " Bartz " as opposed to " Butz " and " Gill " as opposed to " Guido " , the official romanizations in Japan . On December 18 , 2012 the port was re @-@ released as part of the Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Ultimate Box Japanese package . 
 Following the release of the PlayStation 2 , Sony reported that the new system had compatibility issues with the Final Fantasy V half of Final Fantasy Anthology . The game experienced a bug where if players attempted to save their games , a graphical error would occur . Square then released a statement that only the look of the save screen was corrupted , and saving was still possible , and if players wished , repeatedly going into and out of the save screen would make a normal screen eventually appear . This incompatibility was fixed for the PAL and Greatest Hits releases of Final Fantasy Anthology . 
 Final Fantasy V was ported a second time by Tose to the Nintendo Game Boy Advance as Final Fantasy V Advance , which was released on October 12 , 2006 , in Japan , November 6 , 2006 , in North America , and April 20 , 2007 , in Europe . Similar to the Game Boy Advance re @-@ releases of its predecessors , this version features updated graphics , though the changes are very subtle . Additional features include four new jobs ( Gladiator , <unk> , Necromancer , and Oracle ) , a new dungeon called " The Sealed Temple " , and a new optional boss from the back story of Final Fantasy V , Enuo , which was designed by Tetsuya Nomura , the monster designer of the original game . In addition , the game included a bestiary , a quick save function , music player , and additional equipment in the style of previous Game Boy Advance re @-@ releases . Like the remakes of its predecessors , Final Fantasy V Advance featured a new English translation . 
 The original version of the game was released on the Virtual Console in Japan in January 2011 for the Wii and in March 2014 for the Wii U , and the PlayStation version of the game was re @-@ released on the PlayStation Network as a PSone Classic in Japan on April 6 , 2011 , in Europe on April 13 , 2011 and in North America on November 22 , 2011 . 
 On April 27 , 2010 , Square Enix producer Shinji Hashimoto stated that the development of a remake of Final Fantasy V for the Nintendo DS is at present " undecided " due to " technical issues " . However , on June 24 , 2010 , he added that a remake for the Nintendo 3DS is being considered , but he would first have to " look and see how 3DS does , how it evolves , and then make a decision " . In December 2012 Square Enix announced that an updated version of the game will be released on the IOS AppStore . The enhanced port , which was developed by Matrix Software , was released on March 28 , 2013 on iOS devices , with an Android release on 26 September . The game features new high resolution graphics with sprites designed by Kazuko Shibuya , who did the original game 's artwork , new gameplay features such as movement in eight directions and auto @-@ battle , and contains the Sealed Temple and super @-@ boss Enuo from the Game Boy Advance release . In 2015 , Tetsuya Nomura , director of the Final Fantasy VII remake , expressed interest in remaking Final Fantasy V and VI . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In 1994 , Square released an original video animation sequel to Final Fantasy V , simply titled Final Fantasy . Produced by animation studio Madhouse , the anime was released in four 30 @-@ minute VHS tapes in Japan and was set two hundred years after the game . The story focuses on four warriors , one of them the descendant of Bartz , protecting the Wind Crystal from the villain <unk> , who pursues it to achieve godhood . It was localized by Urban Vision in 1998 and released in two VHS volumes for North America under the title Final Fantasy : Legend of the Crystals . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Final Fantasy V has sold 2 @.@ 45 million units on the Super Famicom ( including 2 million copies during its first two months of release ) , while the Japanese Game Boy Advance version has sold nearly 260 @,@ 000 copies as of December 2007 . Final Fantasy Collection sold over 400 @,@ 000 copies in 1999 , making it the 31st best selling release of that year in Japan . The North American release of Final Fantasy Anthology sold 364 @,@ 000 copies as of 2004 . 
 The original Super Famicom version received a positive critical reception upon release , with Famitsu 's four reviewers scoring it 34 out of 40 , and the first GameFan Golden <unk> awarding it for Best Import Game and Best Music ( Import Game ) of 1992 . Retrospectively , 1UP 's staff stated that , while the game 's story was very weak , the gameplay was " another story " , heavily praising the job system and the feature to combine abilities from different job classes , and gave it a score of B- . Allgame 's retrospective review shared similar sentiments regarding the storyline and job system , adding praise for the addition of hidden events and items for players to search for , giving the game a score of 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 . RPGamer gave it a mixed retrospective review , stating that the game improved on the visual presentation , menu system , and overall field navigation of Final Fantasy IV , but the " maddeningly high encounter rate " , " average sound selection " , and " washed out " color palette hurt the game 's presentation , giving it a score of 5 / 10 . 
 Critics gave generally positive to mixed reviews for the Anthology version of the game . GameSpot praised the job system for being " one of the series ' most in @-@ depth and detailed game systems , " but criticized the game for having " paper @-@ thin characters " and a clichéd plot , augmented by a lack of character development during the game 's fetch quests . They went further to say that the translation was poor and overshadowed by the two previous fan efforts . IGN called Final Fantasy V 's graphics " dated " but cited " incredibly engrossing " job system as the game 's highlight and praised its music . Electronic Gaming Monthly repeated the sentiments towards the job system , adding that while the game suffered from long load times periodically , Final Fantasy V was the main reason to buy the collection . 
 In comparison , reviews of the Game Boy Advance re @-@ release of the game were mostly positive . GameSpot 's review regarded the game more favorably than its PlayStation counterpart , calling it " better than ever " and citing the strong localization of the script and extensive special features . They further stated that while the game 's characters seemed unlikable and that the plot felt " predictable or trite " , they felt the game was still more sophisticated than most games at the time , giving the game a score of 8 @.@ 5 . Nintendo Power stated that " while playing Final Fantasy V is a chore on the PlayStation , it 's good fun on the GBA because of the vastly improved translation and new features " , further calling it the " definitive " version of one of the series ' best titles . IGN gave the game a score of 8 @.@ 5 , calling it a " must @-@ own " for the portable system and describing it further as always an " entertaining and surprisingly deep role @-@ playing game " . 1UP.com stated the port of the game from the Super Famicom to the Game Boy Advance was " rock solid " , and added that while the game 's story started off at a slow pace , it gradually improved . The review further praised the addition of features and removal of questionable ones that had been added to the Anthology version of the game . GameDaily gave the game a score of 7 / 10 , noting that while enjoyable , the high encounter rate , the necessity to constantly engage in battle to gain abilities through the job system , and other aspects made the game feel repetitive at times . 
 = Moon ( visual novel ) = 
 Moon ( styled as Moon . ) is a Japanese adult visual novel developed by Tactics , a brand of Nexton , released on November 21 , 1997 playable on Windows PCs . The game was described by the development team as a " Reaching the Heart AVG " ( <unk> , Kokoro ni Todoku AVG ) . The story follows the protagonist Ikumi Amasawa , a girl who joins an organization called Fargo in the hopes of discovering why and how her mother died , who was a member of the same group . The gameplay in Moon follows a branching plot line which offers pre @-@ determined scenarios with courses of interaction , and focuses on the three female main characters . The game ranked twice in the national top 50 for best @-@ selling PC games sold in Japan . 
 Much of the staff that created the game later became the founding members of the visual novel brand Key . Moon was the starting point for Key 's origins , and was the first time the principal Key team was formed . A novel based on the game written by Midori Tateyama was released in July 1998 by Movic . The game 's original soundtrack was released bundled with Dōsei 's soundtrack in August 2000 at Comiket 58 ; Dōsei was Tactics ' first game . Moon has been referenced in other media not directly related to the game , such as in Tactics ' third game One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e , and in the second anime adaptation of Key 's first game Kanon . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Moon is a drama and horror visual novel in which the player assumes the role of Ikumi Amasawa . Much of its gameplay is spent on reading the story 's narrative and dialogue . Moon follows a branching plot line with multiple endings , and depending on the decisions that the player makes during the game , the plot will progress in a specific direction . 
 There are three main plot lines that the player will have the chance to experience , one for each of the heroines in the story . Throughout gameplay , the player is given multiple options to choose from , and text progression pauses at these points until a choice is made . To view all plot lines in their entirety , the player will have to replay the game multiple times and choose different choices to further the plot to an alternate direction . The player has to manually navigate through the corridors of Fargo to explore the surroundings . 
 The game is split into 20 sub @-@ parts each given a title in English written mostly in white where a portion of the title is displayed in red , and each cover a single day . There are seven endings to the game : a single true end , two normal ends , and four bad ends . In the original game , a bonus role @-@ playing game became available on the title screen after the game was completed at least once . This was later removed from the full @-@ voice DVD edition of the game . There are scenes in Moon with sexual CGs depicting a given heroine having sex . 
 = = Plot and characters = = 
 Moon 's story revolves around a mysterious organization known as Fargo . The protagonist of the story is a young girl named Ikumi Amasawa ( <unk> , Amasawa Ikumi , voiced by : Ruru ) who discovers that Fargo was involved with the death of her mother Miyoko Amasawa ( <unk> , Amasawa Miyoko ) six years before the story begins . Miyoko , who would often make special cream stew for her daughter , was a member of Fargo . Following this revelation , Ikumi joins Fargo to discover how and why her mother died while also slowly uncovering the group 's disturbing nature of harnessing psychic abilities through torture . Ikumi ultimately wants to take out her revenge against Fargo for killing her mother . 
 Ikumi had been one of ten girls her age that gathered at a seminar for people who wanted to join Fargo ; she had been ordered to get on a truck which would take the small group to Fargo , and on the ride , Ikumi meets two other girls with similar goals in mind as her . One of the girls is named Haruka Mima ( <unk> , Mima Haruka , voiced by : Aya ) who joined Fargo in order to save her older brother . She starts to work with Ikumi for the sake of their mutual goals . The second girl is named Yui Nakura ( <unk> , Nakura Yui , voiced by : Miya <unk> ) who is searching for her older sister Yuri Nakura ( <unk> , Nakura Yuri , voiced by : Komugi Nishida ) who joined Fargo in order to obtain the ' invisible power ' , a kind of extrasensory perception . Yui has an optimistic personality which hides a gloomy past of which she has no memory of . Each of the girls have a strong will to complete their respective purposes , and they help each other along the way . 
 At Fargo , Ikumi meets others who are affiliated with the group . One such person is Yōko Kanuma ( <unk> , Kanuma Yōko , voiced by : Satomi Kodama ) , a modest believer in Fargo 's cause ; something happened in her past related to her mother . At Fargo , Ikumi lives with a boy known as " Shōnen " ( <unk> , lit . Boy or Young man , voiced by : Arashi Tsunami ) . He helps Ikumi in her search for the answers regarding her mother ; it is never revealed what his true name is . Others include Takatsuki ( <unk> , voiced by : Matsuri <unk> ) , a man in Fargo with an arrogant attitude , and Tsuki ( 月 , lit . Moon ) , the symbol of Fargo and the mastermind behind the entire operation ; he is the main antagonist . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Moon 's production was headed by YET11 , the pseudonym of Tsutomu Yoshizawa . Planning for Moon was headed by Jun Maeda , who also worked on the game 's scenario with fellow writer Naoki Hisaya . Art direction and character design was provided by Itaru Hinoue , while the computer graphics in the game was supplemented by Miracle Mikipon and Shinory . The game 's soundtrack was primarily composed by Shinji Orito , with two tracks composed by YET11 , and one track each composed by Maeda and Ishisan . Excluding YET11 and Ishisan , the staff that created the game later became the founding members of the visual novel brand Key . 
 Moon was first released on November 21 , 1997 playable on a Windows PC as a CD @-@ ROM . Nexton released Moon Renewal on August 21 , 1998 with an improved game engine . AI System published the game under the title Moon Memorial Selection on September 14 , 2000 for a cheaper price . Nexton released Moon DVD <unk> on July 12 , 2002 with added support for Windows 98 / Me / 2000 / XP as a DVD @-@ ROM ; this release was also called Moon DVD Final Version by Nexton . The DVD edition , and subsequent releases , also included full voice acting , two animated sequences at the beginning of the game , and improved graphics . A CD @-@ ROM version of the DVD edition titled Moon CD <unk> was released on three CDs on September 20 , 2002 . Nexton released Moon <unk> Edition was released in Japan on January 30 , 2003 playable as a DVD game . Nexton later re @-@ released the DVD edition with updated support for Windows XP / Vista / 7 on April 2 , 2010 . 
 = = Related media = = 
 A 256 @-@ page novel adaptation written by Midori Tateyama was released by Movic on July 31 , 1998 ( ISBN 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ 387 @-@ 5 ) . A 143 @-@ page art book including art from Moon and Tactics ' later game One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e titled Tactics Moon & One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e <unk> Genga @-@ shū ( <unk> . & ONE ~ 輝く季節へ ~ <unk> ) was published by Compass on October 31 , 1998 ( ISBN 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ 014 @-@ 7 ) . The game 's soundtrack was released bundled with the soundtrack for Dōsei , the game Tactics made before Moon , and was called Dōsei and Moon Original Soundtracks . The album contains a single CD and was released on August 10 , 2000 at Comiket 58 by <unk> Records . The disc contains 31 tracks ; the first 15 pertain to Dōsei and the latter 16 are from Moon . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to a national ranking of how well bishōjo games sold nationally in Japan , the Moon DVD Windows release made the ranking of the top 50 games once at number 44 during the first two weeks of July 2002 . Moon Limited also made it on the list only once , achieving the ranking of 48 in late September 2002 . Ikumi Amasawa appeared in the Eternal Fighter Zero dōjin games by Twilight Frontier . Four characters from Moon can be seen as background characters during scenes in the cafeteria from One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e ; the characters are : Ikumi , Yōko Kanuma , Haruka Mima , and Yui Nakura . There is a reference to Moon in the sixth episode of the Kyoto Animation version of Kanon , which can be seen as the film poster of a horror film that Ayu and Yuichi go to see . 
 = Scarborough ( Metro @-@ North station ) = 
 The Scarborough Metro @-@ North Railroad station serves Scarborough @-@ on @-@ Hudson and Briarcliff Manor , New York , via the Hudson Line . Trains leave for New York City every 25 to 35 minutes on weekdays . The station is 28 @.@ 7 miles ( 46 @.@ 2 km ) from Grand Central Terminal and travel time to Grand Central is about 42 minutes on the express and 61 minutes on local service . The Scarborough station is within walking distance of most houses in the hamlet . As of 2007 , daily commuter ridership was 865 . Trains stop at the station every hour , except during peak hours , when trains stop there two to four times per hour . 
 Construction of the Scarborough station dates back to the 1860s , when the first station building stood along the Hudson River Railroad , which was completed in 1851 and served areas from New York City to Rensselaer . It became part of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority 's Metro @-@ North Railroad in 1983 , when the service was created . The station was included in a revitalization plan in 2007 to help serve its commuters . The 1899 station building has housed the Scarborough post office since 1961 . 
 = = History = = 
 The first station building was built by the Hudson River Railroad sometime before 1860 , and acquired by the New York Central and Hudson River Railroad in 1869 . The station was named " Scarborough " until 1867 . On July 16 of that year and until November 26 , the area was officially called Weskora . The Scarborough station was accordingly changed by local government officials to " Weskora " , and changed back in December 1867 . 
 The Scarborough post office dates to December 3 , 1864 , when the U.S. Postal Service established a " catch and throw " office there in the same small building as the earlier established station . A hook was installed along the tracks to hang mail bags to be grabbed by workers on the passing trains for outgoing mail distribution ; in turn workers threw mail bags off the train for incoming mail distribution . The first postmaster of the Scarborough Post Office facility was James Van Velsor who had an annual salary of $ 200 ( $ 4 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) in 1873 . 
 A large thunderstorm occurred in the area on August 4 , 1898 ; the newly renovated station building , built in 1893 , was struck by lightning and burned to the ground . At the time , the building also housed Scarborough 's post office . Mail was destroyed although registered mail and money was being kept at the postmaster 's house each night ; damage amounted to $ 5 @,@ 000 ( $ 142 @,@ 200 in 2015 ) and the post office opened the next day , with mail being held in a pushcart . The building was reconstructed identically to its predecessor . 
 In 1909 , after the community of Scarborough was incorporated into the village of Briarcliff Manor in 1906 , the New York Central and Hudson River Railroad put up a sign reading " Briarcliff West " at the station . Soon afterward , attributed to the neighborhood 's pride over their name , that sign was thrown into the Hudson River and replaced with the original Scarborough sign . 
 In April 1931 , Siamese King <unk> and Queen <unk> Barni traveled from Bangkok to Ophir Hall ( currently Reid Hall of Manhattanville College ) . The couple had flown from Japan to Vancouver and took a train to Chicago . From Chicago , they took another train , departing at 10 : 30 a.m. on the 21st and arriving at noon on the 22nd , and the trip took 25 hours ; the king had requested the train travel slowly , as he was recovering from bronchitis and malaria . The train arrived at the Scarborough station , where journalists , spectators , and video and still photographers met them , along with one of their hosts ; they were later driven across the county to stay at Ophir Hall for about six weeks in order for a cataract operation could be performed by a New York doctor on the king 's left eye . State troopers and a squad of New York Central policemen were stationed at Scarborough to ensure a smooth transfer . At the time , the king was an absolute monarch ; he later became the country 's first constitutional monarch . 
 The Briarcliff Manor village government purchased the 1899 station building in 1961 to house its Scarborough post office . The building was used as a filming location in 1966 , in the first episode of the television soap opera Dark Shadows as the <unk> train station . 
 As with the rest of the Hudson Line , the Scarborough station became a Penn Central station once the New York Central and Pennsylvania Railroads merged in 1968 . Penn Central 's continuous financial despair throughout the 1970s forced them to turn over their commuter service to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority . The station and the railroad were turned over to Conrail in 1976 , and eventually became part of the MTA 's Metro @-@ North Railroad in 1983 . In 2007 , the MTA overhauled the station , installing new systems such as platforms , canopies , shelters , enclosed staircases , lighting , and benches . The station 's overpass was demolished and a replacement was built with elevators on either side . The new overpass was designed in a less modern style and now has glass @-@ sided elevators . During the construction , Metro @-@ North built a temporary wooden station to the station 's south . 
 In 2010 , Metro @-@ North began a program called Arts for Transit . As part of the program , an art installation was created for the station . The work , titled Untitled with Sky , comprises six stained glass windows and twelve seats covered in mosaic tiles . Liliana Porter and Ana <unk> worked with Willet Hauser Architectural Glass to create the installations . The windows were originally intended for the overpass , where they were installed for a short time . Around 2011 , the windows were moved to the southbound platform . Also in 2011 , Hurricane Irene caused a mudslide onto the tracks near the Scarborough station ; it damaged 300 feet ( 91 m ) of third rail . 
 Local community members have been maintaining the inside and outside of the building through labor and monetary donations under the group name " Save Scarborough " , and brought attention to the post office 's 150th anniversary , celebrated on December 3 , 2014 . About twenty members began their work around 2010 , concerned that the downsizing United States Postal Service would close the Scarborough post office , which is a branch of the Briarcliff Manor post office . As of 2014 , the group has spent almost $ 4 @,@ 000 in various renovations , upkeep , and improvement costs . 
 = = = Notable passengers = = = 
 Ridership is moderate , relative to the other Hudson Line stations , with an average of 865 inbound passengers on weekdays and 233 on weekends in 2007 . Historical ridership included many notable passengers , including William Rockefeller , John D. Rockefeller , C. C. Clarke ( the First Vice President of the Hudson River Railroad ) , Margaret Louisa Vanderbilt Shepard , Walter William Law , and the Webb family . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 = = = Station layout = = = 
 At the Scarborough station , the railroad has four tracks . The two inner tracks not next to either platform are used by express trains ; Track 1 is usually used by northbound express trains , while Track 2 is usually used by southbound express trains . All of the tracks are powered with a third rail , except Track 1 . The station has two high @-@ level side platforms , each eight cars long . The west platform next to Track 4 is for boarding southbound trains , while the east platform next to Track 3 is for boarding northbound trains . 
 = = = Parking = = = 
 The station 's parking lot has had a valet service since the station overhaul in 2007 . The ongoing construction took up parking spaces , which spurred the village government to institute valet parking . The parking service has remained since the construction finished . A private contractor has an agreement with the village for three employees to manage that part of the lot . An additional section of the station parking lot is privately owned . The valet service has no extra charge . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Glastonbury Lake Village = 
 Glastonbury Lake Village was an Iron Age village , situated on a crannog or man made island in the Somerset Levels , near Godney , some 3 miles ( 5 km ) north west of Glastonbury in the southwestern English county of Somerset . It has been designated as a scheduled monument . 
 It has been described as " the best preserved prehistoric village ever found in the United Kingdom " . The site covered an area of 400 feet ( 122 m ) north to south by 300 feet ( 91 m ) east to west . It was first constructed 250 B.C. by laying down timber and clay . Wooden houses and barns were then built on the clay base and occupied by up to 200 people at any time until the village was abandoned around 50 B.C. 
 The site was discovered by Arthur Bulleid in 1892 and excavated over the next 15 years . Artefacts uncovered include wooden and metal objects , many of which are now on display at The Tribunal in Glastonbury High Street , and in the Museum of Somerset in Taunton . Much of the timber was left at the site and soil put back on top of it as the best way to preserve it . Surveys in the late 20th and early 21st century have shown this to be effective , however the site is still at risk because of the risk of further drying out of the soil . 
 = = History = = 
 The village was first built circa 250 B.C. and occupied until approximately 50 B.C. when it was abandoned , possibly due to a rise in the water level . It was built on a morass on an artificial foundation of timber filled with brushwood , bracken , rubble and clay . At least 1 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 100 tons ) of clay were transported to the site from higher ground around 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) away . 
 The village housed people in five to seven groups of round houses , each for an extended family , with sheds and barns , made of hazel and willow covered with reeds , and surrounded either permanently or at certain times by a wooden palisade . There were gaps in the palisade and is believed by <unk> and Coles to have been used to stabilise the clay floors rather than for defensive purposes . At its maximum occupation the village may have had 15 houses in use with a population of up to 200 people . Two distinct phases of occupation have been identified . Early houses were timber framed square or rectangular and built of oak but later buildings were circular huts . Some of the clay spreads were used for barns or animal enclosures rather than houses . 
 The village was close to the old course of the River Brue and was thought to be surrounded by water , hence the title " Lake Village " ; however more recent work suggests the title Swamp Village may be more appropriate as for most of the year the surrounding land was not open water . The Brue was an important water @-@ borne trade route from central Somerset to the Severn Estuary . The village was approached by causeways up to 130 feet ( 40 m ) long and log boats have been recovered from sites close to the village at what may have been a landing stage which was repaired and rebuilt several times . Despite the wet surroundings vegetable and small domesticated and wild mammals , including beaver and otter , made up more of the diet that fish . The remains of wheat , barley and beans have also been recovered . 
 = = = Excavation = = = 
 The lake village , a crannog or man made island , was discovered in 1892 by local medical student Arthur Bulleid , whose father was a local mayor and the founder of the Glastonbury Antiquarian Society . Bulleid had heard about the lake villages in Switzerland and believed similar sites could be found in his native Somerset . 
 The excavation of the area began in 1892 and continued over the next 15 years , uncovering the extent of the settlement and publishing the results . From 1892 until 1899 Bullied worked with labourers for six months of each year and spent the other six months describing and cataloguing the finds . He then left the site to complete his medical studies and returned in 1904 with Harold St George Gray to continue the excavation until 1907 . The curator of the Taunton museum of the Somerset Archaeological and Natural History Society , Gray had been trained in archaeological techniques by the archaeologist Augustus Pitt Rivers . 
 They found remains of the village . It consisted of a series of 89 mounds from 1 @.@ 2 metres ( 3 ft 11 in ) to 4 @.@ 3 metres ( 14 ft ) in diameter , made up of clay laid over the boggy ground , many of which had central hearths . The whole site was surrounded by a wooden palisade made from Alder . Each of the finds from large timber to small fragments of pottery were drawn and described with some also being photographed . In 1909 the site was visited by George V while he was the Prince of Wales , along with his wife . They were given a silver replica of the Glastonbury Bowl . 
 Much of the timber was reburied as the best way of preserving it , and a survey in 2005 found this to have been quite successful , despite reports warning of the area drying out and the peat coverage being reduced . The site is included in the Heritage at Risk Register produced by English Heritage because of the risk to the buried timbers if the site dries out further . 
 Bullied and Gray later went on to excavate a similar site at Meare Lake Village approximately 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) south west of the Glastonbury site . 
 = = Artefacts = = 
 The site and the finds from it are the property of the Glastonbury Antiquarian Society . Many of the finds from the site are on display in the Glastonbury Lake Village Museum at The Tribunal in Glastonbury High Street , and in the Museum of Somerset in Taunton . The burial sites of ten new born babies were uncovered , but there was no evidence of the interment of adults from the village . 
 The artefacts recovered include fragments of pottery , charcoal , bone and a whetstone ( a stone for sharpening blades ) . Later , on excavation , spinning whorls and weaving combs were found , suggesting textile production , although this may have been for domestic use rather than industry . Evidence of bronze @-@ casting and iron @-@ smelting were found . Fine jewellery made from bronze bone have also been found showing a high degree of craftsmanship . Files and hammer heads were examined by <unk> which showed that carbon compositions were found to be generally low . In 1905 an early British tin coin was discovered , believed to be from the 1st century A.D , which was sent to the British Museum . Various other objects from the excavation are also help by the British Museum . 
 = = = Bronze bowl = = = 
 The metal " Glastonbury Bowl " was made from two sections riveted together and repaired several times over its life . The bottom half has been dated as having been constructed in the Iron Age . The upper half was probably added in the 1st century from one sheet of metal , which may have been previously used for another purpose , and the two halves riveted together . 
 = = = Wooden objects = = = 
 The site yielded a number of wooden objects preserved in the peaty soil including five wheel spokes and an unfinished nave to be used as the hub of a wheel . Woven baskets recovered from the site provided evidence of woven baskets up to 700 millimetres ( 28 in ) in width and 480 millimetres ( 19 in ) in height . A wooden frame for stretching animal skins were also recovered along with a shaker and dice made from antlers . 
 Representations of the houses were recreated at the nearby Peat Moors Centre , run by Somerset County Council , before its closure in 2009 . 
 = Fort Wayne , Indiana = 
 Fort Wayne is a city in the U.S. state of Indiana and the seat of Allen County . Located in northeastern Indiana , the city is 18 miles ( 29 km ) west of the Ohio border and 50 miles ( 80 km ) south of the Michigan border . With an estimated population of 260 @,@ 326 in 2015 , Fort Wayne is the 77th most populous city in the United States and the second largest in Indiana , after Indianapolis . It is the principal city of the Fort Wayne metropolitan area , consisting of Allen , Wells , and Whitley counties , a combined population of 419 @,@ 453 as of 2011 . In addition to the three core counties , the combined statistical area ( CSA ) includes Adams , DeKalb , Huntington , Noble , and Steuben counties , with an estimated population of 615 @,@ 077 . 
 Under the direction of American Revolutionary War statesman Anthony Wayne , the United States Army built Fort Wayne last in a series of forts near the Miami tribe village of Kekionga in 1794 . Named in Wayne 's honor , the European @-@ American settlement developed at the confluence of the St. Joseph , St. Marys , and Maumee rivers as a trading post for pioneers . The village was platted in 1823 and underwent tremendous growth after completion of the Wabash and Erie Canal and advent of the railroad . Once a booming manufacturing town located in what became known as the Rust Belt , Fort Wayne 's economy in the 21st century is based upon distribution , transportation and logistics , healthcare , professional and business services , leisure and hospitality , and financial services . The city is a center for the defense industry which employs thousands . 
 Fort Wayne was an All @-@ America City Award recipient in 1982 , 1998 , and 2009 . The city also received an Outstanding Achievement City Livability Award by the U.S. Conference of Mayors in 1999 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 = = = = Native Americans and New France = = = = 
 This area at the confluence of rivers was long occupied by successive cultures of indigenous peoples . The Miami tribe established its settlement of Kekionga at the confluence of the Maumee , St. Joseph , and St. Marys rivers . It was the capital of the Miami nation and related Algonquian tribes . 
 In 1696 , Comte de Frontenac appointed Jean Baptiste Bissot , Sieur de Vincennes as commander of the outpost . The French built Fort Miami in 1697 as part of a group of forts and trading posts built between Quebec and St. Louis . In 1721 , a few years after Bissot 's death , Fort Miami was replaced by Fort St. Philippe des Miamis . The first census in 1744 recorded a population of approximately 40 Frenchmen and 1 @,@ 000 Miami . 
 = = = = British Control = = = = 
 Increasing tension between France and the United Kingdom developed over the territory . In 1760 , the area was ceded to the British Empire after French forces surrendered during the French and Indian War . In 1763 , various Native American nations rebelled against British rule and retook the fort as part of Pontiac 's Rebellion . The Miami regained control of Kekionga , a rule that lasted for more than 30 years . 
 = = = = US Territory occupied by Native Americans = = = = 
 In 1790 , George Washington ordered the United States Army to secure Indiana Territory . Three battles were fought at Kekionga against Little Turtle and the Miami Confederacy . Miami warriors defeated U.S. forces in the first two battles . Anthony Wayne led a third expedition resulting in the destruction of Kekionga and the start of peace negotiations between Little Turtle and the U.S. After General Wayne refused to negotiate , the tribe advanced to Fallen Timbers where they were defeated on August 20 , 1794 . On October 22 , 1794 , U.S. forces captured the Wabash – Erie portage from the Miami Confederacy and built Fort Wayne , named in honor of the general . 
 = = = = White settlement permitted by Treaty of St. Mary 's = = = = 
 The military garrison was discontinued and a federal land office opened to sell land ceded by local Native Americans by the Treaty of St. Mary 's in 1819 . <unk> in 1823 , the village became an important frontier outpost , and was incorporated as the Town of Fort Wayne in 1829 , with a population of 300 . The Wabash and Erie Canal 's opening eased travel to the Great Lakes and Mississippi River , exposing Fort Wayne to expanded economic opportunities . The population topped 2 @,@ 000 when the town was incorporated as the City of Fort Wayne on February 22 , 1840 . Pioneer newspaperman George W. Wood was elected the city 's first mayor . Fort Wayne 's " Summit City " nickname dates from this period , referring to the city 's position at the highest elevation along the canal 's route . As influential as the canal was to the city 's earliest development , it quickly became obsolete after briefly competing with the city 's first railroad , the Pittsburgh , Fort Wayne and Chicago Railway , completed in 1854 . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 At the turn of the 20th century , the city 's population reached nearly 50 @,@ 000 , attributed to a large influx of German and Irish immigrants . Fort Wayne 's " urban working class " thrived in industrial and railroad @-@ related jobs . The city 's economy was substantially based on manufacturing , ushering in an era of innovation with several notable inventions and developments coming out of the city over the years , such as gasoline pumps ( 1885 ) , the refrigerator ( 1913 ) , and in 1972 , the first home video game console . A 1913 flood caused seven deaths , left 15 @,@ 000 homeless , and damaged over 5 @,@ 500 buildings in the worst natural disaster in the city 's history . 
 As the automobile 's prevalence grew , Fort Wayne became a fixture on the Lincoln Highway . Aviation arrived in 1919 with the opening of the city 's first airport , Smith Field . The airport served as Fort Wayne 's primary commercial airfield until Baer Field ( now Fort Wayne International Airport ) was transferred to the city in 1947 after serving as a military base during World War II . 
 Fort Wayne was hit by the Great Depression beginning in 1929 , with most factories cutting their workforce . The stock market crash did not discourage plans to build the city 's first skyscraper and Indiana 's tallest building at the time , the Lincoln Bank Tower . By 1935 , the New Deal 's WPA put over 7 @,@ 000 residents back to work through local infrastructure improvements , including the construction of new parks , bridges , viaducts , and a $ 5 @.@ 2 million sewage treatment facility . 
 The post @-@ World War II economic boom helped the city prosper once again . Between 1950 and 1955 , more than 5 @,@ 000 homes were built , many in large subdivisions in rural Allen County . In 1950 , Fort Wayne 's first bypass , Coliseum Boulevard , opened on the north side of the city , followed by the city 's first arena , War Memorial Coliseum , bringing new opportunities for suburban expansion . The Coliseum was home to the NBA 's Fort Wayne Pistons from 1952 to 1957 . The opening of enclosed shopping malls and the construction of Interstate 69 through rural areas north and west of the city proper further drove the exodus of retail from downtown through the 1960s . According to the Fort Wayne Home Builders Association estimates , more than 80 percent of new home construction occurred outside the city proper in the 1970s . 
 Like many cities in the Rust Belt , deindustrialization in the 1980s brought urban blight , increased crime , and a decrease in blue @-@ collar manufacturing jobs . Downtown and surrounding neighborhoods continued declining as residents and businesses sprawled further into rural Allen County . A 1982 flood forced an evacuation of 9 @,@ 000 residents , damaging 2 @,@ 000 buildings , and costing $ 56 @.@ 1 million ( 1982 USD , $ 137 million 2015 USD ) . 
 The 1990s marked a turnaround for the city , as local leaders focused on crime reduction , economic diversification , and downtown redevelopment . By 1999 , Fort Wayne 's crime rate decreased to levels not seen since 1974 , and the city 's economy recovered , with the unemployment rate hovering at 2 @.@ 4 percent in 1998 . Clearing blighted buildings downtown resulted in new public greenspaces , including Headwaters Park , which has become the premier community gathering space and centerpiece in the city 's $ 50 million flood control project . Fort Wayne celebrated its bicentennial in 1994 . 
 The city continued to concentrate on downtown redevelopment and investment in the 2000s . The decade saw the beginnings of its transformation , with renovations and expansions of the Allen County Public Library , Grand Wayne Convention Center , and Fort Wayne Museum of Art . In 2007 , the $ 130 million Harrison Square development was launched , creating Parkview Field . Suburban growth continued , with the opening of Fort Wayne 's first lifestyle center , Jefferson Pointe , and the half @-@ billion dollar Parkview Regional Medical Center in 2012 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Fort Wayne is in the East North Central region of the Midwestern United States , in northeastern Indiana , 18 miles ( 29 km ) west of Ohio and 50 miles ( 80 km ) south of Michigan . According to the 2010 census , Fort Wayne has a total area of 110 @.@ 834 square miles ( 287 @.@ 06 km2 ) , of which 110 @.@ 62 square miles ( 286 @.@ 50 km2 ) ( or 99 @.@ 81 % ) is land and 0 @.@ 214 square miles ( 0 @.@ 55 km2 ) ( or 0 @.@ 19 % ) is water . 
 For a regional summit , the city is situated on flat land characterized by little topographical relief , a result of the Wisconsin glaciation episode . Receding glaciers eroded the land , depositing an evenly distributed layer of sediment during the last glacial period . The most distinguishable topographical feature is Cedar Creek Canyon , just north of the city proper near <unk> . The Fort Wayne Moraine follows two of the city 's three rivers : the St. Marys and St. Joseph . The two rivers converge to form the Maumee , which eventually empties into Lake Erie . Land east of the moraine includes the former Great Black Swamp , a lacustrine plain formed by Glacial Lake Maumee . The Little River flows southwest of Fort Wayne , a tributary of the Wabash River , and remnant of the Maumee Torrent . The city lies along the St. Lawrence Continental Divide which separates the Great Lakes Basin from the Gulf of Mexico watershed . 
 Fort Wayne 's urban tree canopy is 29 percent , double the state average of 14 @.@ 5 percent and above the national average of 27 @.@ 1 percent . The canopy is decreasing , notably from development and the emerald ash borer infestation . Fort Wayne has been designated a Tree City USA since 1990 . 
 = = = Cityscape = = = 
 Historically , Fort Wayne has been divided into four unofficial quadrants : northeast , northwest , southeast , and southwest . Calhoun Street divides the southwest and southeast , while the St. Joseph River divides the northwest and northeast quadrants . The Maumee River separates the northeast and southeast , while portions of the St. Marys River and Chicago , Fort Wayne and Eastern Railroad separate the northwest and southwest quadrants . 
 Fort Wayne 's early @-@ 20th century development was influenced by the City Beautiful movement and centered on a " park and boulevard plan " conceived by urban planner Charles Mulford Robinson in 1909 and finalized by landscape architect George Kessler in 1912 . The master plan proposed a network of parkways and boulevards connecting the city 's three rivers and Spy Run Creek to dozens of neighborhoods and parks . Several parks were designed by noted landscape architect Arthur Asahel <unk> . Much of the original plan was implemented by 1955 . In 2010 , the Fort Wayne Park and Boulevard System was listed on the National Register of Historic Places , consisting of 11 public parks , four parkways , and ten boulevards , covering 1 @,@ 883 acres ( 762 ha ) . 
 = = = = Architecture = = = = 
 During the 19th century , Fort Wayne was dominated by Greek Revival , Gothic Revival , and Italianate architecture . Examples of Greek Revival architecture remain in the city , with one being the <unk> House ( 1827 ) , a National Historic Landmark . Gothic and Gothic Revival architecture can be found in some of the city 's most prominent churches , including Trinity English Lutheran Church ( 1846 ) , Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception ( 1860 ) , Trinity Episcopal Church ( 1865 ) , and Saint Paul 's Evangelical Lutheran Church ( 1889 ) . 
 Popular early @-@ 20th century architectural styles found in the city include Queen Anne , Richardsonian Romanesque , Neoclassical , Colonial Revival , Dutch Colonial Revival , Tudor Revival , Prairie , American Craftsman , American Foursquare , and Art Deco . Richardsonian Romanesque buildings include Fort Wayne City Hall ( 1893 ) and John H. Bass Mansion ( 1902 ) , each designed by Wing & Mahurin . Notable examples of Neoclassical architecture include the Masonic Temple ( 1926 ) and North Side High School ( 1927 ) . Beaux @-@ Arts , an architectural style closely related to Neoclassical , gained popularity during the City Beautiful movement of the 1890s and early 1900s , which is reflected in the Allen County Courthouse ( 1902 ) . The Allen County Courthouse is one of two National Historic Landmarks in the city . The Pennsylvania Railroad Station , also known as Baker Street Station ( 1914 ) , was designed in American Craftsman style . At 312 feet ( 95 m ) , the Art Deco @-@ style Lincoln Bank Tower was Fort Wayne 's first high @-@ rise and Indiana 's tallest building from 1930 to 1962 . The E. Ross Adair Federal Building and United States Courthouse ( 1932 ) is another example of Art Deco architecture . Williams @-@ Woodland Park Historic District includes examples of Queen Anne and Colonial Revival residential homes , while the Forest Park Boulevard Historic District includes Tudor Revival homes . 
 Modern and Postmodern architecture can be found in buildings constructed during the second half of the 20th century in Fort Wayne . The John D. Haynes House ( 1952 ) was designed by Frank Lloyd Wright , while the campus of Concordia Theological Seminary ( 1953 ) was designed by Eero Saarinen . Postmodern architect Michael Graves ' first commissions were built in the city , including <unk> House ( 1967 ) and <unk> House ( 1972 , now demolished ) . Louis Kahn 's design for the Arts United Center ( 1973 ) was inspired by a violin and its case . Other notable buildings include Indiana Michigan Power Center ( 1982 ) , the tallest building in the city and tallest building in Indiana outside of Indianapolis , at 442 feet ( 135 m ) . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Fort Wayne lies in the humid continental climate zone ( Köppen : Dfa ) , experiencing four distinct seasons . The city is located in USDA hardiness zones 5b and 6a . Typically , summers are hot , humid , and wet . Winters are generally cold with moderate snowfall . The average annual precipitation is 37 @.@ 34 in ( 948 mm ) , recorded at Fort Wayne International Airport . During the winter season , snowfall accumulation averages 33 @.@ 5 in ( 85 cm ) per year . Lake @-@ effect snow is not uncommon to the region , but usually appears in the form of light snow flurries . 
 The National Weather Service reports the highest recorded temperature in the city at 106 ° F ( 41 ° C ) , most recently on June 28 , 2012 , and the lowest recorded temperature at − 24 ° F ( − 31 ° C ) on January 12 , 1918 . The wettest month on record was June 2015 , with 11 @.@ 98 in ( 304 mm ) of precipitation . The greatest 24 @-@ hour rainfall was 4 @.@ 93 in ( 125 mm ) on August 1 , 1926 . The snowiest month on record was January 2014 , with 30 in ( 76 cm ) of snowfall . The greatest 24 @-@ hour snowfall was 13 @.@ 6 in ( 35 cm ) on March 10 , 1964 . 
 Severe weather is not uncommon , particularly in the spring and summer months ; the city experiences an average of 39 thunderstorm days and about 10 severe weather days annually . An EF2 tornado struck northern Fort Wayne on May 26 , 2001 , injuring three and causing damage along the Coliseum Boulevard corridor and a subdivision . Fort Wayne experienced 91 mph ( 146 km / h ) wind gusts in the June 2012 North American derecho , knocking out power to 78 @,@ 000 , uprooting approximately 500 trees , and costing $ 2 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the 2010 Census , there were 253 @,@ 691 people and 113 @,@ 541 households . The racial makeup of the city is 73 @.@ 62 % White , 15 @.@ 41 % Black or African American , 0 @.@ 37 % Native American , 3 @.@ 3 % Asian ( 1 @.@ 4 % Burmese , 0 @.@ 4 % Indian , 0 @.@ 3 % Vietnamese , 0 @.@ 2 % Chinese , 0 @.@ 2 % Filipino , 0 @.@ 1 % Korean , 0 @.@ 1 % Laotian , 0 @.@ 1 % Thai ) , 0 @.@ 06 % Pacific Islander , 3 @.@ 72 % from other races , and 3 @.@ 52 % from two or more races . 7 @.@ 96 % of the population are Hispanic or Latino of any race . Among the Hispanic population , 6 @.@ 1 % are Mexican , 0 @.@ 4 % Puerto Rican , and 0 @.@ 3 % Guatemalan . Non @-@ Hispanic Whites were 70 @.@ 3 % of the population in 2010 , down from 87 @.@ 7 % in 1970 . 
 There were 101 @,@ 585 households of which 30 @.@ 1 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 42 @.@ 3 % were married couples living together , 14 @.@ 8 % had a female householder with no husband present , 4 @.@ 9 % had a male householder with no wife present , and 38 @.@ 0 % were non @-@ families . 31 @.@ 2 % of all households were made up of individuals and 9 @.@ 7 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 44 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 09 . 
 The median age in the city was 34 @.@ 5 years . 26 @.@ 4 % of residents were under the age of 18 ; 10 @.@ 2 % were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 26 @.@ 5 % were from 25 to 44 ; 24 @.@ 9 % were from 45 to 64 ; and 12 % were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the city was 48 @.@ 4 % male and 51 @.@ 6 % female . 
 Fort Wayne has the largest Burmese American population in the U.S. , estimated at 6 @,@ 000 . Burmese refugee settlement and " secondary migrants " doubled the city 's Asian population between 2000 and 2010 . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Fort Wayne is sometimes referred to as the " City of Churches , " an unofficial moniker dating to the late @-@ 19th century when the city was the regional hub of Catholic , Lutheran , and Episcopal faiths . Today , there are 360 churches in the city . 54 percent of Fort Wayne residents identify as religious , where 16 percent are Catholic , 9 percent are Lutheran , 6 @.@ 5 percent are Baptist , 5 percent are Methodist , and 0 @.@ 14 percent are Jewish , with 16 @.@ 5 percent adhering to other Christian faiths . An increasing religious minority is found among the city 's immigrant communities , including Buddhism , Hinduism , and Islam . 
 Major churches include the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception , Saint Paul 's Evangelical Lutheran Church and Trinity Episcopal Church . Fort Wayne 's Reform Judaism population is served by Congregation Achduth Vesholom , the oldest Jewish congregation in Indiana , founded in 1848 . In 2013 , construction began on the first Burmese Muslim mosque to be built worldwide since the mid @-@ 1970s . 
 As of December 2012 , four national Christian denominations were headquartered in the city , including the American Association of Lutheran Churches , Fundamental Baptist Fellowship Association , Missionary Church , and Fellowship of Evangelical Churches . Fort Wayne is the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Wayne – South Bend , covering 14 counties in Northern Indiana , and the Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod Indiana District , encompassing all of Indiana and north central Kentucky . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Manufacturing is deeply rooted in Fort Wayne 's economic history , dating to the earliest days of the city 's growth as an important trade stop along the Wabash and Erie Canal . Railroads , introduced shortly after the canal 's arrival , eased travel from Fort Wayne to other booming industrial centers along the Great Lakes , such as Chicago , Detroit , Toledo , and Cleveland . Throughout the early and mid @-@ 20th century , manufacturing dominated the city 's economic landscape . From 1900 to 1930 , Fort Wayne 's industrial output expanded by 747 percent , with total production valued at $ 95 million in 1929 , up from $ 11 million in 1899 . The total workforce also increased from 18 @,@ 000 in 1900 to nearly 50 @,@ 000 in 1930 . 
 Companies that had a significant presence in the city include Dana Holding Corporation , Falstaff Brewing Corporation , <unk> Corporation , General Electric , International Harvester , Magnavox , Old Crown Brewing Corporation , and <unk> , among several others , producing goods such as refrigerators , washing machines , automatic phonographs , meat packing products , televisions , garbage disposals , automotive parts and motors , trailers , gasoline pumps , trucks , beer , tents and awnings . Magnet wire production became an especially vital component to the city 's economy . In 1960 , Fort Wayne was at the center of the United States magnet wire industry , home to New Haven Wire and Cable Company , Phelps Dodge , Rea Magnet Wire , Superior Essex , and an operation at General Electric , producing nearly 90 percent of North America 's magnet wire . 
 The 1970s and 1980s were times of economic depression in Fort Wayne , when much of the city 's manufacturing foundation eroded and the blue @-@ collar workforce shrank . Fort Wayne joined several other cities reeling economically within the Rust Belt . At the same time , General Electric also downsized much of its more than 10 @,@ 000 @-@ person workforce . Amid other area plant closures and downsizing , coupled with the early 1980s recession , the city lost 30 @,@ 000 jobs and reached a 12 @.@ 1 percent unemployment rate . The arrival of General Motors in 1987 helped fill the void from shuttered manufacturers and aided in the area 's recovery , employing 3 @,@ 000 at its Fort Wayne Assembly . 
 Through the 1990s and into the 2000s , the city diversified its economy ; manufacturing now employs 16 @.@ 9 percent of Allen County 's workforce . Other sectors include distribution , transportation , and logistics ( 23 @.@ 1 percent ) , health care ( 17 @.@ 9 percent ) , professional and business services ( 12 @.@ 1 percent ) , leisure and hospitality ( 11 @.@ 1 percent ) , and financial services ( 6 @.@ 3 percent ) . The leisure and hospitality sector has especially grown , with 5 @.@ 8 million visitors spending $ 545 million in 2013 , a 4 @.@ 3 percent increase over the previous year . The city is a center for the defense industry , employing thousands at such companies as BAE Systems ( 1 @,@ 150 ) , Harris Corporation ( 888 ) , Raytheon Systems ( 950 ) , and the Fort Wayne Air National Guard Station ( 423 ) . Despite economic diversification , the city was significantly impacted by the Great Recession . According to a report from Pew Research Center , the city lost nearly a quarter of its manufacturing jobs and 11 % of its economic status between 2000 and 2014 . In 2014 , Allen County 's workforce was 175 @,@ 530 with an unemployment rate of 7 @.@ 8 percent . 
 Companies based in Fort Wayne include Do it Best , Franklin Electric , Frontier Communications – Central Region , <unk> , Indiana Michigan Power , K & K Insurance , <unk> Group , North American Van Lines , Rea Magnet Wire , Steel Dynamics , Sweetwater Sound , and Vera Bradley . Steel Dynamics is the only Fortune 500 company headquartered in the city , ranking 354th . Founded in 1905 , Lincoln Financial Group was based in Fort Wayne until its move to suburban Philadelphia in 1999 . The company maintains a large presence in the city , employing nearly 2 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Performing arts = = = 
 The Embassy Theatre is a 2 @,@ 471 @-@ seat performing arts theater which hosts over 200 @,@ 000 patrons annually . Since its founding in 1944 , the Fort Wayne Philharmonic Orchestra has often been hosted at the Embassy . The University of Saint Francis Robert Goldstine Performing Arts Center , located on its Downtown Campus , contains a 2 @,@ 086 @-@ seat auditorium . 
 Since its establishment in 2010 , the Cultural District has been home to several of the city 's cultural institutions , including the Fort Wayne Museum of Art , Auer Center for Arts and Culture , Arts United Center , and Hall Community Arts Center . Arts United Center houses the Fort Wayne Civic Theater , Fort Wayne Dance Collective , and Fort Wayne <unk> . Auer Center for Arts and Culture houses Fort Wayne Ballet . Hall Community Arts Center houses Cinema Center , an independent film venue . 
 Though used mainly for exhibitions and conventions , the Grand Wayne Convention Center hosts dance and choir productions , such as the annual Foundation for Art and Music in Education ( FAME ) Northeast Festival . Foellinger Theatre , a 2 @,@ 500 @-@ seat amphitheater in Franke Park , hosts seasonal acts and outdoor concerts during warmer months . Located west of downtown , Arena Dinner Theatre is a nonprofit community arts corporation with a focus on live theater production , annually hosting seven full @-@ length theatrical productions . 
 = = = Museums and attractions = = = 
 The Fort Wayne Children 's Zoo has been lauded as one of the nation 's foremost zoos . Covering 40 acres ( 16 ha ) and containing 1 @,@ 000 animals of 200 different species , the zoo is the largest regional attraction , regularly drawing over 500 @,@ 000 visitors annually . The Foellinger @-@ Freimann Botanical Conservatory gardens cover 24 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 280 m2 ) , displaying over 1 @,@ 200 plants of 502 different species and 72 types of cacti . Science Central , an interactive science center , contains permanent displays and temporary exhibits , drawing 130 @,@ 000 visitors annually . 
 Established in 1921 , the Fort Wayne Museum of Art ( <unk> ) is accredited by the American Alliance of Museums , specializing in the collection and exhibition of American art . The <unk> annually receives 100 @,@ 000 visitors . 
 The History Center , located in Fort Wayne 's Old City Hall , manages a collection of more than 23 @,@ 000 artifacts recalling the region 's history . The center is overseen by the Allen County – Fort Wayne Historical Society , which maintains the <unk> House , one of two National Historic Landmarks in the city . Historic Fort Wayne , a replica of the 1815 fortification , hosts scheduled tours and historical reenactments throughout the year . Other cultural museums include the African / African – American Historical Museum , Fort Wayne Firefighters Museum , Greater Fort Wayne Aviation Museum , and Baer Field Heritage Air Park . 
 The Allen County Public Library 's Fred J. Reynolds Historical Genealogy Department is the second @-@ largest genealogy collection in North America . The collection contains 350 @,@ 000 printed volumes and 513 @,@ 000 items of microfilm and microfiche . 
 = = = Festivals and events = = = 
 The city hosts a variety of cultural festivals and events annually . Festivals commemorating ethnic food , dance , music , and art include <unk> , Greek Festival , and Japanese Cherry Blossom Festival . Initiated in 1997 , Fort Wayne Pride celebrates northeast Indiana 's LGBTQ community . BBQ <unk> showcases barbecue rib cooks and live entertainment , attracting 40 @,@ 000 visitors annually . 
 <unk> is a certified half marathon , 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) run / walk , and health fair . Over 9 @,@ 000 participated in the 2011 half marathon . In 2012 , <unk> debuted a spring cycle , Bike @-@ the @-@ Fort , which included three bicycling tours with over 1 @,@ 000 participants . <unk> begins with the Night of Lights on Thanksgiving eve , with the lighting of the PNC Santa and Reindeer , Wells Fargo Holiday Display , and Indiana Michigan Power Christmas Wreath , ending with a fireworks finale at Parkview Field . 
 The largest annual events in the city are the Johnny Appleseed Festival and the Three Rivers Festival . The Johnny Appleseed Festival draws 300 @,@ 000 visitors . The festival is held at Johnny Appleseed Park , where American folklore legend John Chapman is believed to be buried . Apple @-@ themed cuisine , crafts , and historical demonstrations recalling 19th century American pioneering are among some of the festival 's events . Three Rivers Festival , a celebration of Fort Wayne , spans nine days each July , attracting 400 @,@ 000 visitors . Three Rivers features over 200 events , including a parade , midway , hot dog eating contest , bed race , raft race , arts fair , and fireworks spectacular . Other annual events include the Allen County Fair , <unk> Music Festival , National Soccer Festival , and the Vera Bradley Outlet Sale . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Fort Wayne is home to one professional sports franchise , the ECHL 's Fort Wayne <unk> , and two semi @-@ professional teams : the NBA Development League 's Fort Wayne Mad Ants , and Fort Wayne Derby Girls of the Women 's Flat Track Derby Association Division 2 . These teams compete at the Allen County War Memorial Coliseum . Parkview Field is home to the Midwest League 's Fort Wayne TinCaps . Intercollegiate sports in the city include IPFW in the NCAA 's Division I Summit League and NAIA schools Indiana Tech ( Wolverine – Hoosier Athletic Conference ) and University of Saint Francis ( Crossroads League and Mid @-@ States Football Association ) . 
 The city has been home to other professional sports franchises , including the National Basketball Association 's Fort Wayne Pistons ( which moved to Detroit , Michigan in 1957 ) , the Fort Wayne Daisies of the All @-@ American Girls Professional Baseball League , and the Fort Wayne <unk> of the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players ( precursor to Major League Baseball ) . 
 Some notable events in sports history occurred in Fort Wayne . On June 2 , 1883 , Fort Wayne hosted the Quincy Professionals for one of the first lighted evening baseball games ever recorded . Fort Wayne is also credited as the birthplace of the NBA , as Pistons ' coach Carl Bennett brokered the merger of the BAA and the NBL in 1948 from his Alexander Street home . On March 10 , 1961 , Wilt Chamberlain became the first player in the NBA to reach 3 @,@ 000 points in a single season while competing at the War Memorial Coliseum . 
 Fort Wayne was ranked as the " Best Place in the Country for Minor League Sports " in a 2007 issue of Street & Smith 's Sports Business Journal , dropping to second place in 2009 . 
 = = Parks and recreation = = 
 Fort Wayne Parks and Recreation maintains 86 public parks totaling 2 @,@ 805 acres ( 1 @,@ 135 ha ) . Three public and 20 private golf courses are located in Allen County . Franke Park is the most extensive city park , covering 339 @.@ 24 acres ( 137 @.@ 3 ha ) . Franke is home to the Foellinger Theatre , <unk> Lake , and the Fort Wayne Children 's Zoo . Other notable parks include Johnny Appleseed Park ( home to a campground and John Chapman 's grave ) and McCulloch Park ( home to Samuel Bigger 's grave ) . Foellinger @-@ Freimann Botanical Conservatory , Headwaters Park , Lawton Skatepark , and Historic Fort Wayne are located downtown . <unk> Reservoir , near <unk> , is the largest body of water in Allen County and is popular with watersports enthusiasts for sailing and fishing . Some 300 lakes are located within 50 miles ( 80 km ) of the city . Located downtown along the St. Marys River , Fort Wayne Outfitters offers canoe , kayak , stand @-@ up paddle board , and pontoon boat rentals for recreation along the three rivers . 
 Starting in the 1970s , the city developed a system of recreational trails along the riverbanks , known as the Rivergreenway , with the aim of beautifying the <unk> and promoting active lifestyles for residents . The Rivergreenway was designated a National Recreation Trail in 2009 . As of 2016 , the Rivergreenway had expanded with additional trails to encompass 90 miles ( 140 km ) throughout the city and county . With the expansion of trails in recent years , cycling has become an emerging mode of transportation for residents . In 2009 , the city 's first bicycle lanes were established with the installation of 250 bike parking places . In 2012 , the League of American Bicyclists rated Fort Wayne at the Bronze Level for " providing safe accommodation and facilities for bicyclists and encouraging residents to bike for transportation and recreation . " 
 The Fort Wayne Trail Network was used by 480 @,@ 000 people in 2012 , an increase of 30 percent over the previous year . 
 = = Government = = 
 Fort Wayne has a mayor – council government . The mayor , city clerk , and city council members serve four @-@ year terms . 
 Fort Wayne 's mayor is Tom Henry , a Democrat , who was elected in 2007 . Henry succeeded Democrat Graham Richard who chose not to run for re @-@ election after two terms as mayor . Henry was re @-@ elected to a third term in 2015 . Karl <unk> was appointed deputy mayor in 2013 . Lana <unk> was elected city clerk in 2015 . Fort Wayne City Council has nine elected members , one representative from each of the city 's six council districts and three at @-@ large members , serving four @-@ year terms . 
 The city is represented in the Indiana General Assembly by three Senate Districts and seven House Districts . Fort Wayne 's state senators include Dennis Kruse ( 14th District ) , Liz Brown ( 15th ) , and David Long ( 16th ) . Representatives include Dan Leonard ( 50th District ) , Ben Smaltz ( 52nd ) , Phil <unk> ( 80th ) , Martin <unk> ( 81st ) , Christopher Judy ( 83rd ) , Bob Morris ( 84th ) , and Casey Cox ( 85th ) . Federally , Fort Wayne is part of Indiana 's 3rd congressional district , represented by Republican Marlin Stutzman , a position he has held since 2010 . 
 Under the <unk> provision of Indiana Law , city @-@ county consolidation would have been automatic when Fort Wayne 's population exceeded 250 @,@ 000 and became a first class city in Indiana . Fort Wayne nearly met the state requirements for first class city designation on January 1 , 2006 when 12 @.@ 8 square miles ( 33 km2 ) of neighboring <unk> Township ( and a small section of Wayne Township ) including 25 @,@ 094 people were annexed . However , a 2004 legislative change raised the population requirements from 250 @,@ 000 to 600 @,@ 000 , which ensured Indianapolis ' status as the only first class city in Indiana . 
 Fort Wayne 's E. Ross Adair Federal Building and U.S. Courthouse houses the United States District Court for the Northern District of Indiana , which was authorized by Congress in 1928 . 
 Municipal and state laws are enforced by the Fort Wayne Police Department , an organization of 460 officers . In 2006 , Fort Wayne 's crime rate was <unk> @.@ 1 per 100 @,@ 000 people , slightly above the national average of <unk> @.@ 3 . There were 18 murders , 404 robberies , and 2 @,@ 128 burglaries in 2006 . Garry Hamilton was appointed to the position of police chief in 2014 . Also in 2014 , Rusty York was appointed to the position of director of public safety . York previously served as police chief from 2000 to 2014 . As of 2010 , the Fort Wayne Fire Department includes 375 uniformed firefighters and 18 fire stations . Eric Lahey was appointed fire chief in 2014 . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Primary and secondary education = = = 
 Fort Wayne Community Schools ( <unk> ) is the largest public school district in Indiana , enrolling 30 @,@ 981 students as of the 2013 – 2014 academic year . <unk> operate 51 facilities , including 31 elementary schools , ten middle schools , and five high schools . The student body is diverse , with 75 spoken languages in the district . East Allen County Schools ( <unk> ) operate 20 schools , with a total enrollment of 9 @,@ 114 . Northwest Allen County Schools ( <unk> ) operate seven elementary schools , two middle schools , and one high school , with a total enrollment of 6 @,@ 853 . Southwest Allen County Schools ( SACS ) operate six elementary schools , two middle schools , and one high school , with a total enrollment of 6 @,@ 995 . Private primary and secondary education is offered largely through Lutheran Schools of Indiana and the Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Wayne – South Bend . Amish Parochial Schools of Indiana has schools through eighth grade in rural eastern Allen County . 
 = = = Higher education = = = 
 Fort Wayne is home to Indiana 's fifth @-@ largest public university , Indiana University – Purdue University Fort Wayne ( IPFW ) , enrolling 13 @,@ 459 students . IPFW is home to the Fort Wayne Center for Medical Education , a branch of the Indiana University School of Medicine . Three private universities are located in the city , including Concordia Theological Seminary , Indiana Institute of Technology , and the University of Saint Francis . Private universities with regional branches in Fort Wayne include Crossroads Bible College , Grace College and Theological Seminary , Huntington University , Indiana Wesleyan University , Manchester University College of Pharmacy , and Trine University . Other colleges include Brown Mackie College , Ivy Tech Community College , Harrison College , International Business College , ITT Technical Institute , <unk> College , National College , and Ross Medical Education Center . 
 = = = Libraries = = = 
 Composed of 14 branches , the Allen County Public Library is among the 20 largest public libraries in the U.S. , and ranks 89th factoring in academic libraries , with 3 @.@ 4 million volumes . The library 's foundation is also among the nation 's largest , with $ 14 million in assets . The entire library system underwent an $ 84 @.@ 1 million overhaul from 2002 to 2007 . In 2009 , over 7 @.@ 4 million materials were borrowed by patrons , with over 3 million visits made throughout the library system . 
 = = Media = = 
 Major broadcasting network affiliates include <unk> @-@ TV ( CBS ) , WPTA @-@ TV ( ABC ) , WISE @-@ TV ( NBC ) , WFFT @-@ TV ( Fox ) , and <unk> @-@ TV , Northeast Indiana 's PBS member station . Religious broadcasters include <unk> and <unk> . Access Fort Wayne maintains Fort Wayne and Allen County 's Public Access capabilities serving from the Allen County Public Library . Two National Public Radio stations are based in the city , <unk> and <unk> with the new <unk> Community Radio Station soon coming online . 
 Fort Wayne is served by two primary newspapers , the Journal Gazette and Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning News @-@ Sentinel . The two dailies have separate editorial departments , but under a joint operating agreement , printing , advertising , and circulation are handled by Fort Wayne Newspapers , Inc . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Fort Wayne includes two municipal airports , both managed by the Fort Wayne – Allen County Airport Authority . Fort Wayne International Airport ( FWA ) is the city 's primary commercial airport , with five airlines offering direct service to 13 domestic connections . The airport is Indiana 's third @-@ busiest airport , serving almost 650 @,@ 000 passengers in 2010 . Fort Wayne International is also home to the <unk> Fighter Wing 's Fort Wayne Air National Guard Station . Smith Field , in northern Fort Wayne , is used primarily for general aviation . 
 Fort Wayne is served by a single interstate ( Interstate 69 ) along with an auxiliary beltway ( Interstate 469 ) . I @-@ 69 runs south to Indianapolis and north to the Canada – United States border at Port Huron , Michigan . Four U.S. Routes bisect the city , including US 24 , US 27 , US 30 , and US 33 . Five Indiana State Roads also meet in the city , including State Road 1 , State Road 3 , State Road 14 , State Road 37 , and State Road 930 . Airport Expressway , a four @-@ lane divided highway , links Fort Wayne International Airport directly to I @-@ 69 . About 85 percent of residents commute alone by personal vehicle , while another eight percent carpool . 
 Unlike most cities comparable to its size , Fort Wayne does not have an urban freeway system . In 1946 , planners proposed a $ 27 million federally funded freeway , crossing east @-@ west and north @-@ south through downtown . Opponents successfully campaigned against the proposal , objecting to the demolition of nearly 1 @,@ 500 homes at the time of the post @-@ World War II housing shortage , while playing on fears that the project would force displaced minorities into white neighborhoods . In 1947 , Fort Wayne residents voted down the referendum that would have allowed for its construction , dubbed the Anthony Wayne Parkway . Beginning in 1962 , construction commenced for I @-@ 69 in suburban Fort Wayne . 
 The I @-@ 469 beltway around the southern and eastern fringes of Fort Wayne and New Haven was constructed between 1988 and 1995 as the largest public works project in Allen County history , at $ 207 million . 
 Amtrak 's Capitol Limited ( Chicago — Washington , D.C. ) is the closest passenger rail service to Fort Wayne , located 25 miles ( 40 km ) north at Waterloo Station . There has been a movement to bring direct passenger rail service back in the form of Amtrak or high @-@ speed rail service . In 2013 , a feasibility study was published outlining the impacts of a proposed Columbus — Fort Wayne — Chicago high @-@ speed rail corridor . At 300 miles ( 480 km ) , the route would cost $ 1 @.@ 29 billion and generate some $ 7 @.@ 1 billion in economic benefits to the region . Freight service is provided by a class I railroad ( Norfolk Southern ) and two class III railroads ( CSX Transportation ) . Fort Wayne is headquarters and main operations hub of Norfolk Southern 's Triple Crown Services subsidiary , the largest truckload shipper in the U.S. 
 Fort Wayne 's mass transit system is managed by the Fort Wayne Public Transportation Corporation ( Citilink ) , providing 12 bus routes through the cities of Fort Wayne and New Haven via downtown 's Central Station . <unk> debuted in 2009 as a free shuttle service for students , faculty , and general public traveling between Ivy Tech 's Coliseum and North campuses , IPFW and its student housing on the Waterfield Campus , and shopping and residential areas . <unk> debuted in 2013 connecting Parkview Regional Medical Center with Parkview Health 's <unk> campus . Despite annual ridership of 2 @.@ 2 million , less than one percent of residents commute by public transportation . Fort Wayne is served by two intercity bus providers : Greyhound Lines ( Indianapolis — Toledo — Detroit ) and Lakefront Lines ( Chicago — Columbus — Akron ) . 
 In 2016 , the city introduced its first bike @-@ sharing program , including five stations and 25 bicycles . 
 = = = Health care = = = 
 Fort Wayne is served by six hospitals ; Dupont Hospital , Lutheran Hospital of Indiana , Parkview Regional Medical Center , Parkview Hospital <unk> , Rehabilitation Hospital of Fort Wayne , and St. Joseph Hospital , encompassing over 1 @,@ 463 patient beds . These six hospitals belong to either of the two health networks serving the region : Parkview Health System or Lutheran Health Network . As of 2014 , both healthcare systems were the city 's first and second largest employers , respectively , with a total of 9 @,@ 011 employees . VA Northern Indiana Health Care System 's Fort Wayne Campus provides medical services through the Department of Veterans Affairs . 
 = = = Utilities = = = 
 Water and sewage treatment are municipal services . The City of Fort Wayne supplies residents with 72 million US gallons ( 270 @,@ 000 m3 ) of water per day via the Three Rivers Water Filtration Plant and St. Joseph River . Private utility providers serving residents include Indiana Michigan Power ( electricity ) ; Northern Indiana Public Service Company ( natural gas ) ; Republic Services ( curbside recycling and solid waste collection ) ; and Frontier Communications and Comcast ( telecommunications and television ) . 
 <unk> Reservoir , in northeast Allen County , contains 1 @.@ 8 billion US gallons ( 6 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 m3 ) of water to be rationed in the event of a drought or disaster at the three rivers . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 Fort Wayne has four sister cities as designated by Sister Cities International : 
 <unk> , Japan ( 1977 ) 
 Płock , Poland ( 1990 ) 
 Gera , Germany ( 1992 ) 
 Taizhou , China ( 2012 ) 
 Friendship city 
 <unk> , Burma ( Myanmar ) ( 2015 ) 
 = John de Gray = 
 John de Gray or de Grey ( died 18 October 1214 ) was a medieval English Bishop of Norwich , and the elected but unconfirmed Archbishop of Canterbury . He was employed in the service of John of England even before John 's coronation as king , for which he was rewarded with a number of ecclesiastical offices , culminating in his pro forma election to Norwich in 1200 . De Gray continued in royal service after his elevation to the episcopate , lending the King money and undertaking diplomatic missions on his behalf . In 1205 King John attempted to further reward de Gray with a translation to the archbishopric of Canterbury , but a disputed election process led to de Gray 's selection being quashed by Pope Innocent III in 1206 . 
 Innocent consecrated Stephen Langton as archbishop against John 's wishes , triggering a long dispute between the papacy and the King . The pope imposed various sanctions on England and John ; at one point de Gray was one of only two bishops still legitimately holding office in England . In 1209 he became governor of Ireland for John , and spent until 1213 attempting to impose royal government on the Anglo @-@ Norman barons and the native Irish in that country . Recalled to England to help defend against a threatened invasion by the French , de Gray then travelled to Rome to secure a papal pardon after the final settlement of John and Innocent 's dispute over the bishop 's abortive elevation to Canterbury . After securing his pardon de Gray was appointed Bishop of Durham , but he died on his way back to England . 
 De Gray built a palace in his diocese and several castles in Ireland . Although reviled by one contemporary writer as an " evil counsellor " to the King , modern historians have been more forgiving ; one praised his intelligence and others stated that de Gray was one of the few men King John trusted throughout his life . De Gray 's nephew , Walter de Gray , secured the office of Lord Chancellor with his uncle 's help in 1205 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Some describe de Gray as a native of Norfolk ; he was likely descended from the Norman knight , <unk> de Greye . De Gray was the uncle of Walter de Gray , later Archbishop of York . The elder de Gray was instrumental in securing the selection of his nephew as Lord Chancellor , as he was a surety for Walter 's payment of a fine of 5000 marks to acquire the position . 
 By 1196 de Gray was in the service of Prince John ( later King John ) , and was keeper of John 's seal by 1198 . After John 's accession to the throne of England in 1199 de Gray became Archdeacon of Cleveland in March 1200 , and Archdeacon of Gloucester before April that year . He also served as John 's secretary , and frequently as a deputy for the Lord Chancellor , Hubert Walter . Shortly after John became king , de Gray began travelling between England and the continent on royal business , and for the first two years of John 's reign was active in the royal chancery , sealing royal charters . 
 De Gray was elected Bishop of Norwich on about 7 September 1200 , although the election was purely pro forma , as acknowledged by a contemporary writer Roger of Howden , who stated that the new bishop " succeeded to the bishopric of Norwich by the gift of King John " . De Gray was consecrated on 24 September . His consecration took place together with that of the new Bishop of Hereford Giles de Braose at Westminster , at the conclusion of a provincial church council held by Archbishop Walter , which de Gray had been attending . Walter performed the ceremony in a chapel of Westminster Abbey . 
 = = Bishop of Norwich = = 
 While bishop , de Gray often lent the king money , and on one occasion held the royal regalia as security for the repayment of a loan ; he also served as a royal justice . In 1203 de Gray accompanied Archbishop Hubert Walter and several papal legates on an unsuccessful diplomatic mission to King Philip II of France . Philip had demanded that John 's niece Eleanor of Brittany or his nephew Arthur of Brittany be surrendered to him together with all of John 's lands on the continent , none of which John was prepared to concede . Philip invaded Normandy after the bishops returned to England . 
 In 1203 some of de Gray 's knights were part of the garrison at the castle of Vaudreuil in Normandy , serving under the command of Robert FitzWalter . Although they had provisions and John was moving in support of the troops , in the summer of 1203 the garrison surrendered to Philip , shortly after a siege had begun . When John abandoned Normandy in late 1203 , effectively relinquishing control of the duchy to Philip , de Gray was one of his companions on the journey to the port of Barfleur , and went on to England with the king . 
 = = Archbishop @-@ elect = = 
 John 's attempt to impose de Gray 's election as Archbishop of Canterbury in 1205 was the beginning of the king 's long quarrel with Pope Innocent III . After Hubert Walter 's death in July 1205 , the selection of a successor was hindered by doubts about what the proper procedure should be , something that commonly happened with elections to Canterbury . John postponed a decision while delegations from the bishops of England and the monks of the cathedral chapter went to Rome to seek guidance from the pope . The bishops of the province of Canterbury claimed the right to a say in who was elected , as whoever was chosen would be their superior , but according to canon law the monks of the cathedral chapter had the right to elect the new archbishop . The king also had a say in the election , as the archbishop was a major tenant @-@ in @-@ chief and was traditionally one of the principal royal advisors . 
 While the delegations from the various parties were in Rome , the monks of Canterbury secretly elected one of their own , Reginald , as archbishop , and subsequently sent him to Rome to join the delegation . When John discovered that Reginald had been elected without any royal input he forced the monks to elect de Gray as archbishop . Some stories have Reginald 's election taking place before the despatch of the first delegation to the papal curia . Another source , Gervase of Canterbury , has the king telling the chapter they could choose their own nominee after six months , while the king secretly sent envoys to Rome to secure de Gray 's election . A further story , from Roger of Wendover , states that the monks elected Reginald before Walter was even buried , and that only a few members of the cathedral chapter – the younger ones – participated in the election . Wendover wrote in the 1230s and was not a monk of Canterbury , therefore it is unlikely he has recorded a true account . 
 De Gray was postulated , or nominated , to Canterbury on 11 December 1205 , which presented Innocent with two candidates for the office . In an effort to reach a compromise , the pope quashed both nominations on about 30 March 1206 ; Innocent 's reason for invalidating de Gray 's candidacy was that any election was invalid if an earlier one was still under appeal to the papacy . The monks then elected Stephen Langton , with Innocent 's approval . John did not accept Langton 's candidacy however , and Innocent 's consecration of Langton in 1207 led to an eight @-@ year struggle between John and the pope over the rights of the king to secure the election of his choice as archbishop . John refused to allow Langton to enter England and exiled the Canterbury monks . Innocent placed an interdict on England in 1207 , which John countered by confiscating the income and estates of any clergy who enforced it . Innocent went on to excommunicate John in 1209 , in a dispute that led to the exile of many of the English clergy and John 's imposition of heavy financial demands on the church in England ; by 1209 de Gray and Peter des Roches , the Bishop of Winchester , were the only English bishops not in exile or dead . But it was not until 1213 , when Innocent began to support John 's deposition , that the king became concerned and reached a settlement with the papacy . 
 = = In Ireland = = 
 By 1209 de Gray was in Ireland serving as the king 's governor , an office sometimes referred to as justiciar for Ireland . One possible reason for his appointment was to save him from being accused of ignoring the interdict on England . As a bishop , it was de Gray 's ecclesiastical duty to enforce the interdict , but by going to Ireland , which was not under interdict , he could continue to serve the king without provoking the papacy . De Gray 's chief policy in Ireland was to extend English rule , to which end he was involved in battles on the River Shannon and in Fermanagh . He also replaced the Irish coinage with English , and attempted unsuccessfully to make English laws applicable in Ireland . De Gray 's term of office in Ireland coincided with a time of change in Irish governmental practices . 
 During John 's persecution of William de Braose in 1209 , William Marshal gave de Braose shelter on his Irish lands . De Gray demanded that Marshal surrender de Braose to him as a traitor , but Marshal refused , claiming that since he held some lands from de Braose , it would be an act of treason to surrender his lord to an outside authority . Marshal 's refusal does not seem to have embittered de Gray however , as three years later the bishop was praising him in a letter to John . 
 John led an expedition to Ireland in 1210 in an effort to bring the Anglo @-@ Norman barons under control . He opened talks with the native Irish kings , and some accounts state that his negotiations were so successful that the native Irish submitted to him . In contrast , the historian Seán Duffy has argued that the native Irish nobility were just as resistant to John as the Anglo @-@ Norman barons . After John 's return to England he ordered de Gray to build three new castles in Connacht , one of them at Athlone . Associated with the castle building were two military invasions of Connacht by the royal government – one from Meath and Leinster and the other from Munster . De Gray left Ireland in 1211 to lead a military campaign against the Welsh , leaving his deputy Richard de <unk> in charge of the country . 
 De Gray also faced resistance from the northern Irish . In 1212 he led a campaign against Áed <unk> , in the promotion of which he constructed castles at <unk> <unk> , <unk> , and Clones , bases for raids against the Ua Néill territory in the north . A naval campaign was also launched , but to no avail . De Gray suffered a defeat at the hands of Cormac O <unk> in 1212 at <unk> , Offaly , and left Ireland the following year . He continued to hold the office of governor for a time , but by July 1213 he had been replaced by Henry de <unk> , the Archbishop of Dublin . One of de Gray 's final acts as justiciar was to take a force of Irish knights to England to help repel a threatened invasion by the French king Philip II . 
 = = Episcopal affairs and later career = = 
 As bishop , de Gray settled a long @-@ running dispute between the monks of his cathedral chapter and his predecessors as bishop . He also allowed the monks of his cathedral chapter the right to appoint and replace the clergy of the dependent churches of the cathedral . De Gray received a 1203 missive from Innocent III decrying the marriages of some secular clergy , in contravention of canon law . In more secular matters , he granted the town of Bishop 's Lynn ( now King 's Lynn ) the right to hold a weekly market and two fairs per year . He also built a palace at <unk> . 
 De Gray 's ability to raise money made him useful to John . In 1213 de Gray mustered 500 knights during a period when Philip II was threatening to invade England , bringing this force over from Ireland along with mounted men @-@ at @-@ arms to support the king in England . In May 1213 , John and Innocent finally resolved the dispute over Langton 's election to Canterbury , and part of the settlement was that John gave Ireland and England to Innocent and received them back from the pope , making John a papal vassal . The settlement was sealed with a treaty , to which de Gray was one of the witnesses . After John settled with the papacy , de Gray was not included in the general pardon , and had to go to Rome to be pardoned . While in that city the bishop was named as one of the guarantors of a new financial arrangement between the king and the pope dealing with feudal payments from England , which lowered the lump sum that had to be paid before Innocent would lift the interdict . After Innocent pardoned de Gray , the pope recommended his election as Bishop of Durham in 1213 ; but de Gray died during his journey back to England on 18 October 1214 , at Saint @-@ Jean @-@ d <unk> in Poitou . He was buried in Norwich Cathedral , but his tomb has not survived . 
 As well as encouraging his nephew 's career , de Gray took into his household two of Hubert Walter 's household clerks : David , and Robert of <unk> . Another clerk employed by de Gray , Robert de Bingham , was in the bishop 's household during the papal interdict on England ; he went on to become a tutor in theology at Oxford , and Bishop of Salisbury in 1228 . 
 De Gray remained close to John for most of the bishop 's life , and one of the King 's chief fundraisers . Sidney Painter , a historian and biographer of John , said of de Gray that he was " probably the only man whom John trusted absolutely and without reservation for the whole period of their association " . The medievalist Ralph Turner called de Gray " one of John 's greatest favourites " , and another of John 's biographers , W. L. Warren , described de Gray as " one of the best brains of the royal administration " . Matthew Paris , a medieval writer , called him an " evil counsellor " , and blamed many of the difficulties of John 's later reign on de Gray 's failed election to Canterbury . 
 = Pilot ( Hawaii Five @-@ 0 ) = 
 The pilot episode of the reimagined crime series Hawaii Five @-@ 0 premiered on CBS in the United States on September 20 , 2010 . The pilot 's teleplay was written by Peter M. Lenkov , based on a story developed by Lenkov , Alex Kurtzman and Roberto Orci , and was directed by Len Wiseman . The episode introduces the four main characters : Alex O 'Loughlin as series protagonist and Navy SEAL , Lt. Commander Steve McGarrett , Scott Caan as Steve 's partner Danny Williams , a former Detective from New Jersey who moved to Hawaii to be close to his daughter , Grace , Daniel Dae Kim as Chin Ho Kelly , a disgraced HPD cop and Grace Park as Kono Kalakaua , a former surfer @-@ turned @-@ HPD Academy graduate who is also Chin 's cousin . In the pilot , McGarrett returns to Hawaii to find Victor Hesse ( James Marsters ) , a terrorist who murdered his father , John McGarrett . The Governor of Hawaii , Pat Jameson ( Jean Smart ) offers McGarrett to head a new task force to fight serious crimes by any means . 
 Since the end of the original Hawaii Five @-@ O series , there had been a number of attempts to create a remake , but ultimately none went beyond the pilot stage . CBS later hired Lenkov to pitch a pilot story . Kurtzman and Orci were approached ; while originally hesitant to participate in the project , they were impressed with Lenkov 's pitch . The episode was filmed in March 2010 and took over two weeks to shoot . When the episode became too long certain sequences were cut from the final product , including the funeral scene with Taryn Manning as McGarrett 's sister ; the character would be introduced in a later episode . Almost 14 @.@ 2 million Americans viewed the pilot , increasing to 17 @.@ 59 million when Live + 7 @-@ day digital video recordings ( DVR ) are taken into account , and was also considered a ratings success in other countries . Critical reactions were generally positive . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins in Pohang , South Korea , where Navy SEAL commander Steve McGarrett ( Alex O 'Loughlin ) is transporting prisoner Anton Hesse ( Norman Reedus ) . Anton 's brother , Victor ( James Marsters ) calls McGarrett to announce he is holding his father , John McGarrett ( William Sadler ) , in Honolulu , and wants to make an exchange . However , Victor is in fact tracking McGarrett 's convoy ; two helicopters arrive and ambush it . In the midst of the skirmish , McGarrett is forced to kill Anton when he brandishes a weapon . In response , Victor executes John . 
 McGarrett returns to Hawaii to attend his father 's funeral , where he meets state governor Patricia Jameson ( Jean Smart ) . Jameson offers McGarrett to lead a new task force to apprehend Hesse and clean up the criminal underworld in the state by any means . However , McGarrett initially refuses and goes to his father 's home to investigate the crime scene . While searching the house he finds that Hesse has an accomplice , and also notices a tool box marked " Champ " ( in the beginning of the episode , John referred to his son as " champ " despite never calling him that before ) . As he takes the box , which has evidence on a case John must have wanted his son to solve , he is confronted by the lead detective in the case , Danny Williams ( Scott Caan ) , a divorcee from New Jersey who moved to Hawaii to be close to his daughter Grace ( <unk> Grubbs ) after she moved with her mother and her new husband . Despite initial friction between the two , McGarrett decides to accept Jameson 's offer , and appoints a reluctant Danny as his partner . They find a lead in suspected gun runner Fred Doran ( Jonathan Clarke <unk> ) ; ballistics evidence suggests it came from a gun once owned by Doran . When they arrive at his quonset hut , he attempts to flee , but is killed by Danny following a standoff . 
 Initially dismayed that Danny shot the only lead to Hesse , McGarrett finds Chen Chi ( Allison Chu ) , a smuggled immigrant from China who was sold to Doran , leading McGarrett to believe human traffickers smuggled Hesse to Hawaii . In order to find out who , McGarrett and Danny turn to Chin Ho Kelly ( Daniel Dae Kim ) , one of John 's proteges . He left the Honolulu Police Department disgraced after he was accused of corruption . After Chin Ho asserts his innocence , McGarrett offers him to join his task force . The trio meet with Chin Ho 's friend , former police informant and current owner of a shave ice business Kamekona ( Teila Tuli ) . Kamekona believes the <unk> leader is Sang Min ( Will Yun Lee ) . In order to apprehend Sang Min , Chin Ho decides to appoint his cousin , Kono Kalakaua ( Grace Park ) as a plant . Kono was a former professional surfer turned police academy graduate . She goes undercover as a Chinese immigrant to meet with Sang Min . The conversation is monitored by the rest of the team through up @-@ to @-@ date laser audio surveillance , eliminating the need for a wire . However , it has emerged that Sang Min has a mole in HPD , who identifies Kono as a cop . The team storm the warehouse , and McGarrett apprehends Sang Min . 
 In the interrogation , McGarrett informs Sang Min that if he goes to prison , his Rwandan wife and son will be deported , leaving his son at the mercy of the Hutu militias . If he cooperates , McGarrett will ensure they stay in America . Sang Min reveals that Hesse is going to leave the island on a Chinese freighter . Danny and McGarrett hastily drive to the docks . They then proceed to assault the freighter , where they dispatch several of Hesse 's guards . McGarrett confronts Hesse , and shoots him off the boat . At the end of the episode , the new team settle into their new office space , and cannot settle on a name for their new unit . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background and writing = = = 
 The idea for a remake of Hawaii Five @-@ O first came about in 1996 , when CBS commissioned a sequel starring Gary Busey and Russell Wong , along with a cameo appearance by James MacArthur , who portrayed the original Danny Williams , as Danny who was promoted to the state governor . Though the pilot was produced , it was never released . Twelve years later , on August 12 , 2008 , CBS commissioned another sequel to Five @-@ O , with Criminal Minds executive producer Edward Allen <unk> appointed to write the pilot . The sequel would center on Steve McGarrett 's son . However the sequel was never produced . 
 Later , CBS approached CSI : NY writer Peter M. Lenkov to pitch a reimagined pilot of the show , as Lenkov himself was a fan of the original . When executive producers Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman known about the remake , the two were originally hesitant to participate , but were impressed by Lenkov 's pitch , since the story had " such a great kind of paradigm for the show and how to really get into the characters that he really talked us into it . " All three developed the story of the pilot , though Lenkov was the one who wrote the script . On February 19 , 2010 , CBS ordered the production of the pilot , with Len Wiseman chosen to direct . It was the first time Wiseman worked on a television program , and it was also the first time he used digital cinematography rather than film . 
 The producers discussed changing Kono to a female character . Lenkov noted that the producers did not have reservations as he initially though , but instead embraced the idea , as it would empower women in the remake by including them as main characters and not just victims or other minor characters . The pilot episode of the original series already established the Five @-@ O task force , and when writing the pilot Lenkov wanted to give a proper introduction to the characters so that the audience can get to know them . Another difference in both the original and reimagined shows was the genre ; the original was more police procedural , whereas the remake would be more action orientated , as well as some comedy mixed in , particularly from the banter between McGarrett and Danny . In the original script , there was no fighting between the two main characters , but the producers felt this would launch their partnership . Lenkov also included the return of an iconic catch phrase from the original series , " Book ' em , Danno " . A table read @-@ through of the pilot took place on February 19 , 2010 . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The first principal actor to be cast was Daniel Dae Kim for the role of Chin Ho Kelly . Before he was cast , Dae Kim worked on the final season of Lost , in which he portrayed regular character Jin @-@ Soo Kwon . The actor wanted to find more work after he finished , and was offered a chance to appear on Five @-@ 0 . Dae Kim spent some time with HPD officers , as well as viewing some episodes of the original series as " homework " for the character . Alex O 'Loughlin was next to be cast as the main protagonist Steve McGarrett . Despite playing two series on CBS , Moonlight and Three Rivers , that were cancelled in their first year , CBS was still interested in having O 'Loughlin headline another series . However , the producers initially had reservations casting the actor , until they realized his dedication towards the role . Grace Park was later cast as Kono Kalakaua . It is the second time she starred in a re @-@ imagined television series in which her role was previously portrayed by a male in its original incarnation , the first being Battlestar Galactica in which she portrayed Sharon " Boomer " Valerii , a part that was played by Herbert Jefferson , Jr. in the original series . The producers had Park in mind because of her previous role on Battlestar . The producers also felt that another male Kono would be boring for the show . Scott Caan was the last principal cast member to be cast on the show , as Danny Williams . Being cast at " the eleventh hour " , the first time Caan and O 'Loughlin met was during rehearsal . 
 In addition to the regular cast , a number of recurring characters were introduced in the pilot . Teila Tuli ( credited as Taylor Wily ) was introduced as confidential informant and shave ice entrepreneur Kamekona . Lenkov , who initially designed the character from <unk> Bear on Starsky and Hutch , took a liking to the actor following his audition , and was given the role . In March 2010 it was announced that Jean Smart would play state governor Pat Jameson . In the same month it was announced that James Marsters would appear in the pilot as the nemesis to McGarrett . After some speculation , in July Lenkov announced that Marsters would " most likely " return later in the season . In one of the deleted scenes of the pilot from the first season DVD boxset , an alternate ending featured Hesse swimming ashore after McGarrett shot him . Will Yun Lee was cast as Sang Min . The character was originally a one @-@ off , but because the producers were impressed by Yun Lee 's performance , he would appear in a further three episodes in the first season . In February 2010 , Taryn Manning was cast as McGarrett 's sister , Mary Ann , who was originally intended to appear at her father 's funeral . However , her scenes were cut . Mary Ann would later be formally introduced in the fourth episode , " <unk> " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming began two weeks after the <unk> , on March 5 , 2010 , and took over two weeks to shoot . Wiseman 's direction was to film the episode like a " postcard of Hawaii , " but at the same time show its darker side when the team fight the antagonists . Dae Kim 's schedule overlapped between the Five @-@ 0 pilot and Lost , although at the time his character in the latter show was in the process of being killed off . The first few days of filming was affected due to bad weather conditions , particularly strong winds and sudden sporadic rain showers . The first day was spent in Pearl Harbor , near the USS Missouri ( BB @-@ 63 ) . Line producer Pat Crowley made an appearance as a helicopter pilot . The second day of filming took place at the North Shore , shooting scenes for Kono 's introduction . Before filming began , Park , who had never surfed before , was taught the basics , though the scenes in which Kono surfs were mostly done by a body double . Filming was severely hindered by bad weather , forcing the production team to reschedule . Day three was spent on Kamekona 's scenes . 
 March 10 and 11 were dedicated to the scenes in Sang Min 's warehouse . The team 's assault of the warehouse was filmed by three separate units . Kono 's fight sequence was included to assert to the audience that she would be a valuable asset to the team . In the scene where McGarrett shoots Sang Min 's Mercedes @-@ Benz before it crashes into a shipping container was done with two separate takes , the first of which involved O 'Loughlin shooting blanks into a car . The car would swerve away . The second take saw the car crash into the container with O 'Loughlin away from the shot as McGarrett was in close proximity to the car . The eighth day of filming was spent in a village of quonset huts where McGarrett and Danny chase Doran . In one part of the sequence , McGarrett jumps over the trunk of one car as it was hit from behind by another car . To make the scene a reality , the film crew made a three @-@ part composite shot to ensure no harm came to O 'Loughlin . 
 The tenth and eleventh filming days were spent shooting the scenes of McGarrett and Danny assaulting Hesse 's freighter . The fight scene between McGarrett and Hesse were shot with the portraying actors . Stunt doubles were on hand , but the production staff found they were not needed in the fight scenes until both characters fell into a boat below or the sea . The first " Book ' em , Danno " line was filmed several times as the staff wanted to pick out the right version . Some of the last scenes to be shot were the cold open scenes . Three days were spent on those scenes , and were filmed at <unk> Ranch . In one scene of the episode , McGarrett goes to the garage of his father 's house and unravels a Mercury Marquis . The car was in fact used on the original show and was on loan to the production staff by its owner , who was the stand @-@ in for Jack Lord , who played the original McGarrett . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Some scenes of the episode contained backgrounds that were added with digital effects . One such scene was on Danny 's ex @-@ wife 's house , which did not have mountains in the background ; the mountains were digitally added in post @-@ production . The same technique was used again on the village of quonset huts , and again on the freighter assault scenes , only with the background of the sea when Hesse and McGarrett fight . After the episode was filmed , the producers discovered that it was too long and spent two weeks deciding what to cut out . One of the scenes involved the team deciding on a name of their task force , but that scene was cut in favor of another episode . Manning 's scenes were also cut due from the final broadcast to the length , though viewers could still make out the top of her head in the finished episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The pilot aired on CBS on September 20 , 2010 , during the 10 to 11 pm ( ET ) timeslot . It was on the 42nd anniversary of the airing of the original Hawaii Five @-@ O pilot in 1968 . The pilot episode was seen by 14 @.@ 199 million viewers , with a total household rating / share of 8 @.@ 9 / 15 , and a 3 @.@ 9 / 11 ratings / share among those aged 18 through 49 . The pilot came first in its timeslot , beating the third season premiere of ABC crime comedy @-@ drama Castle , and the series premiere of the NBC crime series Chase . However , the 18 to 49 ratings for the pilot fell ten per cent against the eighth season premiere of CSI : Miami , which occupied the timeslot in the previous year . Regardless , the pilot became the eleventh most viewed show on American television the week it aired . Ratings for the pilot was also given a significant boost in Live + 7 @-@ day digital video recording ( DVR ) ; the 18 to 49 ratings / share went up to 5 @.@ 0 , whereas total viewership increased to 17 @.@ 587 million viewers , the largest increase of the week . 
 In Canada , the pilot aired on the Global Television Network on the same day and timeslot , and was watched by 2 @.@ 136 million viewers , placing eleventh for the week . In Australia it was seen by 1 @.@ 25 million viewers across the five major cities . It helped achieve a strong night for Network Ten . In the United Kingdom , the pilot aired alongside the following episode " <unk> " on February 6 , 2011 on digital channel Sky1 . The pilot was watched by 1 @.@ 024 million viewers , placing it as the second most seen show for the channel , and sixth on all digital channels . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Critical reaction towards the pilot were generally positive . Eric Goldman of IGN rated the pilot eight out of ten . Goldman admitted that while he " never had any interest in the many stories of forensics investigators and the various bodily fluids they can use to solve crimes , " he found " new series engaging and fun . " Goldman particularly praised Caan 's performance in the episode , stating he " is very good , bringing a lot of humor to the part and finding an easy chemistry with O 'Loughlin . Per usual for this type of story , McGarrett and Danny don 't get along initially and Caan is able to add a lot of charm to small moments like Danny saying to himself , " I hate him . I hate him so much . " However , the reviewer also enjoyed the main cast in general , stating they were a " very well cast and likable bunch and make this an easily accessible series . They 're a group you want to spend more time with . " Adam Sweeting of The Arts Desk stated " The refreshing thing about Five @-@ 0 ( revisited ) is that while it has been given a brisk 21st @-@ century spring clean , with international terrorism , people @-@ smuggling and a blast of ultra @-@ modern spook technology , its uncomplicated heart still belongs to the 1970s . " Sweeting added that " the good guys ( and girl ) are clearly identified , " and " the baddies are unambiguously despicable . " 
 A reviewer from The Honolulu Advertiser called it " A smart script , " with " slick production values and maybe a splash of nostalgia got the remake of Hawaii Five @-@ O placed on the CBS prime @-@ time lineup this fall , but it will take more than beefcake and a remixed theme song to keep the show on the air . " The piece also pointed out that times have changed since the original series left the air , citing other shows that were set in Hawaii which have come and gone . It expressed a hope that the producers will succeed in bringing a new life to the title with this remake . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly graded the episode B + , calling it an " unexpected pleasure , " and praised Caan for being " terrific as the moody but excellent " Danno . Tucker also believed that Kim and Park " play off each other nicely . " Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times felt that the script was " neatly balanced between action , clever banter and serious issues , " adding that it " seems poised to hold its own in the modern age . " McNamara also liked O 'Loughlin 's performance , stating that his " limpid @-@ eye woodenness " worked well for the role . Hanh Nguyen of Zap2it stated that it was " damn entertaining " and " visually stimulating , " and enjoyed the chemistry between McGarrett and Danny . 
 Not all reviews were positive . David Hinkley of The New York Daily News rated the pilot three out of five stars , stating " The story and the chemistry work , but periodically the action feels rushed , as if we all know the drill and we might as well get it over with . Future episodes may correct that , because they 'll need less setup work . " Brian Lowry of Variety stated " On paper , " Hawaii Five @-@ 0 " appears destined for can 't @-@ miss success , offering a pre @-@ sold name , an attractive cast and a stunning location , " but felt the millions spent on the pilot " doesn 't necessarily indicate smooth sailing , relying as it does on playful banter ( more like frat @-@ boy hazing ) between the leads that grows tiresome even before the hour 's over . " Ellen Gray of the Philadelphia Daily News felt it was " a huge let down , " and was critical of the cast 's performance , in particular O 'Loughlin and Caan . 
 = = Home video release = = 
 The pilot , along with the other 23 episodes from the first season , was released on a six @-@ disc DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc set in the United States on September 20 , 2011 . The box @-@ set had a series of deleted scenes from most episodes , including the pilot . The deleted scenes shown included Mary Ann during John 's funeral , Chin Ho interrogating an underaged shoplifter , and Hesse waking up on shore . The episode also contained an audio commentary track by Peter M. Lenkov , Len Wiseman and Roberto Orci , along with its own featurette entitled Picture Perfect – The Making of the Pilot . 
 = Entoloma austroprunicolor = 
 Entoloma austroprunicolor is a species of agaric fungus in the family Entolomataceae . Described as new to science in 2007 , it is found in Tasmania , where it fruits on the ground of wet sclerophyll forests in late spring to early winter ( usually between January and March ) . The fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) have reddish @-@ purple caps measuring up to 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter supported by whitish stipes measuring 3 – 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 0 in ) long by 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 2 in ) thick . On the cap underside , the crowded gills are initially white before turning pink as the spores mature . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first formally described in 2007 by Australian mycologist Genevieve Gates and Dutch mycologist Machiel Noordeloos , from collections made in Tasmania , Australia . The specific epithet austroprunicolor is derived from the Latin prefix <unk> , meaning " southern " , and the Latin word <unk> , meaning " plum @-@ coloured " . The type collection was made in January 2002 at <unk> Falls , near <unk> in southern Tasmania . The species was discovered as a result of intensive field research , conducted by Gates and David <unk> , which began in 1998 . Realizing that many Tasmanian Entolomataceae species were undescribed , they and their collaborators published a series of papers documenting the new fungi . 
 Within the genus Entoloma , the fungus is classified in the subgenus Leptonia , section <unk> because of its overall habit , <unk> hyphae , and abundant granules of pigment . Noordeloos and Gates place it in the stirps ( a grouping of related species within a genus ) <unk> , characterized by mushrooms with a violaceous pink or blue cap that contrasts with a pallid , whitish , polished stipe . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap measures 1 to 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 2 in ) in diameter , and is convex or umbonate ( having a central rounded elevation resembling a nipple ) . It is bluish @-@ purple when young before reddening to a reddish @-@ purple and eventually fading to a more purplish @-@ grey colour . The cap surface texture is initially fibrillose ( made of loose fibers ) to <unk> ( made of short , fine " hairs " that form a velvety surface ) , and then breaks up into small radially arranged fibrillose squamules ( small scales ) as it matures . The cap margin curves downward . Gills are closely crowded together , up to 6 mm broad , and have an adnate attachment to the stipe . They are white initially before becoming tinged with pink from the developing spores . The thin cylindrical stipe measures 3 – 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 0 in ) long and 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 2 in ) wide with a slightly thicker base . It is dry and brittle , hollow , and white or nearly white . The flesh is purple in the cap , and white in the stipe . The smell and taste are indistinct , although the latter has been described as peppery or radish @-@ like . Its edibility is unknown . 
 The spore print is pink , and the spores measure 10 – 13 by 6 – 9 μm . They are <unk> ( with different diameters in different directions ) , possessing between 6 and 8 pronounced angles . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored , lack clamps , and measure 33 – 40 by 9 – 14 μm . Located on the gill edge , the thin @-@ walled , inconspicuous cheilocystidia measure 20 – 30 by 5 – 9 μm and have shapes ranging from irregular cylinders to narrow clubs to flasks . The cap cuticle is arranged in the form of a cutis ( with bent @-@ over hyphae that run parallel to the cap surface ) to a trichoderm ( where the outermost hyphae emerge roughly parallel , perpendicular to the cap surface ) , comprising cylindrical to inflated hyphae that are up to 20 μm wide . The cap tissue is made of narrow cylindrical hyphae that are 4 @.@ 5 – 9 μm in diameter . They contain granules that have a purple @-@ brown pigment . The stipe cuticle is made of loosely arranged , cylindrical hyphae measuring 2 – 7 μm . Clamp connections are absent from the hyphae . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Entoloma austroprunicolor resembles the European species E. <unk> , but the cap of the latter species fades to an ochre colour , and it has a white fibrillose stipe . Microscopically , its gill edges have well @-@ differentiated cheilocystidia . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Entoloma austroprunicolor is a commonly occurring mushroom of wet sclerophyll forests in Tasmania . Fruiting occurs from late spring to early winter , with most fruit bodies recorded between the months of January to March . In a study of the distribution of mushroom species in this area , it was found to occur only in mature or uncut forests . 
 = Daily fantasy sports = 
 Daily fantasy sports ( DFS ) are a subset of fantasy sport games . As with traditional fantasy sports games , players compete against others by building a team of professional athletes from a particular league or competition while remaining under a salary cap , and earn points based on the actual statistical performance of the players in real @-@ world competitions . Daily fantasy sports are an accelerated variant of traditional fantasy sports that are conducted over short @-@ term periods , such as a week or single day of competition , as opposed to those that are played across an entire season . Daily fantasy sports are typically structured in the form of paid competitions typically referred to as a " contest " ; winners receive a share of a pre @-@ determined pot funded by their entry fees . A portion of entry fee payments go to the provider as rake revenue . 
 In the United States , the daily fantasy sports industry is dominated by two competing services : the New York @-@ based FanDuel , and the Boston @-@ based DraftKings . Both companies were established as venture capital @-@ backed startup companies , received funding from investment firms , sports broadcasters , leagues , and team owners , and became known for the aggressive marketing of their services . As of September 2015 , both companies have an estimated value of at least $ 1 billion , and control 95 % of the U.S. DFS market . The two primarily compete against smaller DFS services , such as Fantasy Aces and Yahoo ! Sports . The popularity of the daily fantasy format has been credited to its convenience in comparison to season @-@ length games , as well as the focus on major cash prizes in the promotion of these services . Daily fantasy has also been credited with helping to improve television viewership and engagement with sports . 
 Daily fantasy sports have faced notable legal challenges , including disputes over whether DFS constitutes gambling . Politicians and other critics have argued that due to their format , players are essentially making proposition wagers on the varying performance of individual athletes in specific games , and not managing the performance of their selections on a week @-@ to @-@ week basis . Proponents have defended DFS as being a game of skill , as the required familiarity with the players and teams , as well as salary cap management , rewards skilled players . Local laws have varying definitions of gambling games , such as whether a game 's elements of chance are predominant over those or skill , or how much control the player has over the outcome of the game . 
 In the United States , the legality of DFS has been determined on a state @-@ by @-@ state basis based on local gambling laws and other rulings . The federal Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act ( <unk> ) contains language dictating that fantasy sports are not considered an unlawful wager under the act ; however , the act only prohibits the electronic transfer of funds from unlawful gambling as defined under state laws . A number of state attorneys general have issued opinions concluding that DFS is a form of illegal gambling , while the state of Nevada declared that DFS games must be licensed as a sports pool . The New York State ruling , which resulted from an investigation of DFS services after it was alleged that employees working for DraftKings and FanDuel had used inside information to win cash prizes from each other , spawned retaliatory lawsuits from the companies which alleged that the rulings were the result of a misinterpretation of the nature of their services . The state has since joined other states , such as Massachusetts and Virginia , in choosing to legalize and regulate DFS rather than prohibit it . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 There are several main disciplines of daily fantasy sports competitions , divided into two categories : cash games , and guaranteed prize pool ( GPP ) . DFS contests typically utilize a salary cap format , in which players are allotted a maximum budget to spend on athletes for their team , represented as either play money or points . Each athlete has their own cost , with elite athletes having the highest costs . 
 In " Double @-@ up " or " 50 / 50 " cash game competitions , players win a prize equal to double their entry fee if they finish with a score within the top 50 % of all participants . Head @-@ to @-@ head competitions are similar , except that the player must win against another user of their choice . Guaranteed prize pool contests have higher stakes , using tiered payouts based on finishing in different percentiles or positions of the field of contestants . Further variations of double @-@ up games , including Triple @-@ up , Quadruple @-@ up , and <unk> @-@ up , may also be offered . 
 Daily fantasy games exist in a variety of major and minor sports , depending on service , including but not limited to American football ( college and the NFL ) , association football ( soccer ) , auto racing , baseball , basketball , cricket , golf , ice hockey , rugby , horse racing and sumo wrestling . Daily fantasy contests have also been held in professional @-@ level e @-@ sports events . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early examples = = = 
 Among the first sites to specialize in the format of daily fantasy was Instant Fantasy Sports , established in 2007 ; the service 's co @-@ founder Chris <unk> explained that the service was inspired by the format of online poker , and that his goal was to " take the time frame of season @-@ long fantasy sports leagues and shrink it " . The site was later acquired by NBC Universal and re @-@ branded as <unk> . NBC has also acquired the fantasy sports @-@ focused website <unk> in 2006 . <unk> was later shut down . 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 On July 21 , 2009 , the Edinburgh , Scotland @-@ based prediction market game <unk> launched a spin @-@ off known as FanDuel ; the service attempted to market itself as a modern alternative to the fantasy sports services provided by other media properties , such as Yahoo ! Sports and CBSSports.com , with the daily fantasy format and integration with popular social networks . Its founder , Nigel Eccles , was inspired to create the site when he <unk> that the carve @-@ out for fantasy sports in the U.S. Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act of 2006 did not state that a legal , paid fantasy sports competition had to last for an entire season . In February 2012 , the Boston @-@ based DraftKings was established by former <unk> executives Jason Robins , Matthew Kalish , and Paul Liberman . DraftKings gained a local , Somerville @-@ based competitor in <unk> , when it introduced a daily fantasy game of its own . 
 DraftKings and FanDuel in particular became the subjects of venture capital investments by various parties ; in April 2013 , Major League Baseball invested an undisclosed amount in DraftKings , becoming the first U.S. professional sports organization to invest in daily fantasy sports . In 2014 , DraftKings acquired <unk> , as well as <unk> , and raised another $ 41 million in investment led by the Raine Group , bringing the company to a total of $ 75 million in outside funding . FanDuel pursued investments as well , with an $ 11 million Series C funding round that included Comcast Ventures , a $ 70 million Series D round in September 2014 led by Shamrock Capital Advisors with participation from NBC Sports Ventures and KKR among others , and a Series E funding round of $ 275 million in July 2015 , valuing the company at over $ 1 billion . In October 2014 , NBC Sports entered into a content sharing partnership with the DFS information website <unk> , in which it would provide daily fantasy @-@ oriented content for <unk> . 
 DraftKings and FanDuel began to peruse advertising and endorsement deals with sports franchises and leagues ; in November 2014 , DraftKings entered into a multi @-@ year sponsorship deal with the National Hockey League , complimenting team @-@ level sponsorship deals it had reached with seven NHL franchises . Also in November , the National Basketball Association acquired an equity stake in FanDuel and entered into a four @-@ year sponsorship deal with the company . In April 2015 , after the National Football League began to allow daily fantasy providers to sign multi @-@ year team sponsorship deals , with caveats , FanDuel reached deals with sixteen NFL teams for placements on team @-@ oriented digital properties , radio , and in @-@ stadium . DraftKings had also received an investment by Robert Kraft — a local businessman whose holdings include the New England Patriots . 
 = = = Mainstream popularity = = = 
 By 2015 , the daily fantasy sports industry had experienced a major growth in mainstream popularity . The rise was credited to several factors , including the convenience of the format , the ability to access the services on mobile devices , and aggressive marketing campaigns which promoted the prospective cash prizes of their largest contests . The structure and payouts of daily fantasy games have been described as providing a feeling of " instant gratification " to its players , similar to that of online gambling . 
 Writing for The New York Times Magazine , Jay Caspian Kang noted that despite its similarities to gambling , DFS appealed to mainstream sports fans because it evoked the feelings of community commonly associated with traditional fantasy sports , rather than the " shady underground games " of poker . The popularity of daily fantasy has also influenced fan engagement with sports ; Fox Sports president Erik Shanks felt that daily fantasy sports help improve television viewership of sporting events , while FanDuel stated that players became more engaged with sports content after joining the service . 
 In July 2015 , Yahoo ! , a historic provider of season @-@ length fantasy sports , announced that it would begin to offer paid daily and weekly fantasy games as part of its Yahoo ! Sports website . Moneyball , one of the first Australian DFS services , was also established by former Fairfax Media employees James Fitzgerald and <unk> Huq ; the company secured $ 1 @.@ 8 million in series A funding . Fitzgerald noted that the sports betting industry in Australia had brought in $ 900 million in yearly revenue and that DFS was " a more ethically and morally preferred means of partnership with a bookmaker . " 
 In September 2015 , DraftKings and FanDuel expanded their offerings into competitive video gaming ; FanDuel acquired the e @-@ sports focused DFS service <unk> ( which FanDuel planned to operate as an independent brand ) , while DraftKings added contests for the 2015 League of Legends World Championship . 
 = = = Increased scrutiny = = = 
 In 2015 , daily fantasy sports began to face increased legal scrutiny . In August 2015 , a class action lawsuit was filed against DraftKings , alleging that it engaged in false advertising in regards to a promotion in which the service claimed it would double a new user 's first deposit . The suit alleged that DraftKings would only credit the deposit bonus to a player 's account if they fulfill certain monetary and participation requirements within four months , causing them to " incur additional and substantial monetary obligations " , rather than instantly receive the bonus as implied by advertising . 
 On October 6 , 2015 , following reports that a DraftKings employee had used inside information to win $ 350 @,@ 000 on FanDuel , New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman announced that he had opened an investigation into the two services and the allegations that employees from the two services were using this information to win prizes from each other . Both sites have since barred their employees from participating in daily fantasy games . On October 14 , 2015 , the FBI launched an investigation of its own into the two services regarding the inside information scandal . 
 In the wake of the scandal , multiple class @-@ action lawsuits were filed against both DraftKings and FanDuel , with suits alleging charges such as fraud , racketeering , negligence , and false advertising , arguing that the employees ' use of inside information had made the games unfair . One of the lawsuits were filed by a resident of New Orleans , despite paid fantasy games being illegal in the state . On October 30 , 2015 , Washington NFL player Pierre Garçon also filed a class @-@ action lawsuit against FanDuel , arguing that the service had exploited his name and likeness without permission as part of its services and marketing . FanDuel objected to the lawsuit , arguing that its use of his likeness fell within existing case law surrounding the use of player names and statistics in fantasy sports games . Garçon 's lawsuit was settled out of court . 
 In December 2015 , Canadian media company <unk> launched <unk> , a daily fantasy game targeted at both Canada and the United States , based on the intellectual property of its 2014 acquisition of <unk> . In contrast to other DFS services and in an effort to work around the increased scrutiny and uncertain legality of paid games , the service is being positioned as a free @-@ to @-@ play service with smaller cash prizes , a more " casual " atmosphere with fewer " sharks " , and the possibility of being advertising @-@ funded in the future . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 The aggressive marketing tactics used <unk> fantasy services have also had an impact on the growth of the industry . In June 2015 , DraftKings entered into a three @-@ year sponsorship deal with ESPN valued at $ 250 million ; the deal gave DraftKings exclusivity in advertising daily fantasy services on ESPN networks beginning in January 2016 , and included " integration " of the service into ESPN 's television and digital content . DraftKings also entered into an advertising deal with Fox Sports ; in exchange for Fox acquiring an $ 150 million equity stake in the company , DraftKings agreed to buy $ 250 million in advertising over the next three years . DraftKings ' sponsorship exclusivity deal with ESPN was also to include the acquisition of an equity stake in the company , but this aspect of the deal was reportedly called off due to objections by ESPN 's parent , The Walt Disney Company , over financially associating itself with activities that could be classified as gambling . 
 DraftKings and FanDuel also became known for their use of direct response advertising on television , especially during sports telecasts . Capitalizing on the start of football season , <unk> estimated that DraftKings and FanDuel collectively spent over $ 107 million on television advertising in September 2015 alone — with nearly half being spent on advertising during National Football League telecasts ( $ 23 @.@ 6 million by DraftKings , and $ 26 @.@ 7 million spent by FanDuel ) . Of the total , $ 60 @.@ 1 million was spent by DraftKings , with $ 7 @.@ 95 million spent during college football games , $ 2 @.@ 05 million during ESPN 's sports news program SportsCenter , and $ 1 @.@ 36 million during South Park episodes . The marketing push was met with a negative reaction from viewers on social networks such as Twitter , who considered the repetitive airplay of DFS commercials during football games to be an annoyance . 
 On February 10 , 2016 , it was reported that ESPN had backed out of its advertising deal with DraftKings , and that Fox had marked down its investment in DraftKings by 60 % — a loss of $ 95 million . 
 = = Classification as gambling = = 
 There are conflicting arguments over whether paid daily fantasy sports games constitute gambling , due to its mixture of chance @-@ based and skill @-@ based elements . Critics of DFS have argued that because athlete performance can vary on a week @-@ to @-@ week basis , players are essentially wagering on the performance of individual athletes during a given game , rather than managing their team on a week @-@ to @-@ week basis across a season . On the other hand , proponents have argued that the act of preparing a daily fantasy team is an activity of skill , as it requires knowledge of the sport , its individual players and their respective performance at a particular moment in time , and the ability to select suitable players within the limitation of a salary cap . 
 In an " <unk> " thread on Reddit , DraftKings CEO Jason Robins described the service as being " almost identical to a casino " , described the concept of DFS as a cross between fantasy sports and online poker , and repeatedly referred to the service using gambling @-@ oriented terms such as " wager " and " betting " . DraftKings and FanDuel have also entered into affiliation and sponsorship agreements with gambling @-@ oriented entities ; DraftKings sponsored the 2015 Belmont Stakes and the World Series of Poker , while FanDuel has affiliated with websites related to sports betting . At the same time , both companies have insisted that their daily fantasy games represent a game of skill . In the 2007 federal lawsuit Humphrey v. Viacom , Inc . , Judge Dennis M. Cavanaugh of the U.S. District Court of New Jersey distinguished an " entry fee " in a paid fantasy sports competition as being a fee required to participate rather than a " wager " , because they are " paid unconditionally " , and because the prizes in such games were " guaranteed " and determined in advance . 
 = = = Skill of players = = = 
 Bloomberg Businessweek acknowledged that daily fantasy contests are often won by a minority of skilled professional players ( e.g. Justin B <unk> ) , or " sharks " , who employ " elaborate statistical modeling and automated tools that can manage hundreds of entries at once and identify the weakest opponents " . A DFS player interviewed by Bloomberg argued that " no matter how much somebody knows about sports , if you put an established player up against a new player , that established player 's probably going to have a 75 percent chance of winning — at least . " A study by McKinsey & Company over the first half of the 2015 MLB season estimated that 91 % of winnings were won by only 1 @.@ 3 % of players . FanDuel CEO Nigel Eccles disputed the accuracy of the study , arguing that its daily fantasy baseball contests do not have as many participants as those it runs for football . 
 Writing for The New York Times Magazine , Jay Caspian Kang outlined his position on the fairness and skill @-@ based aspects of DFS , explaining that " <unk> , the game itself , is not inherently crooked . Most of the benefits praised by its enthusiasts — the ease of play , the camaraderie among fans , the challenge of solving what amounts to a math puzzle — are real . It does take skill to parse game film , diligently follow the news and interpret the thousands of bits of sports information that are generated each night . If a problem gambler at the poker rooms I frequent in New York City were to hire a programmer and flood the <unk> market with his lineups , he would almost certainly hemorrhage money . " 
 In response to these concerns , DFS services implemented changes to improve the fairness and transparency of their contests , including entry limits , banning off @-@ site scripts , identifying veteran @-@ level players , allowing users to block players they do not wish to compete against , and adding beginner @-@ level contests intended for new users . 
 = = = Legal definitions of gambling = = = 
 In U.S. federal law , criminal gambling statutes include the Federal Wire Act — which prohibits interstate sports wagering , the Illegal Gambling Business Act ( 18 U.S.C. § 1955 ) — which prohibits the interstate conduct of wagering activity prohibited under state law , and the Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act ( UIGEA ) — which prohibits the transfer of funds in connection to online gambling that is prohibited under state law . 
 Each state applies varying standards in regards to determining whether a game is one of skill , or of chance ; in most states , this determination is based on whether the skill @-@ based elements of the game are predominant over those of chance , and whether these chance @-@ based elements have more than an incidental effect on the outcome of the game ( dominant factor test , material degree ) . Some states use stricter criteria , under which games whose outcomes are influenced by any element of chance , or appeal to a " gambling instinct " , are considered games of chance , regardless of the presence of skill @-@ based elements . In the state of Illinois , any game played for cash where the players are not the " actual contestants " in a " bona fide contest for the determination of skill , speed , strength , or endurance " , constitutes gambling . 
 In 2015 , the Canadian Gaming Association commissioned an opinion on the legality of DFS in Canada from former Alcohol and Gaming Commission of Ontario general counsel Don Bourgeois . He determined that DFS would likely be classified as a game of chance under Canadian law , going on to say in an interview that under the Criminal Code of Canada , games that mix <unk> and skill @-@ based elements are considered games of chance . However , Canadian authorities have not yet targeted DFS services ; historically , the government has only targeted illegal gambling operations that have a presence within the country . There is a form of legal sports betting in Canada conducted through the lottery system , often known as Sport Select , but it is subject to a legal prohibition on wagering on individual sporting events . 
 = = = = UIGEA carve @-@ out = = = = 
 The UIGEA has frequently been cited as having exempted daily fantasy games from being considered gambling , as the law does not consider an online contest with pre @-@ determined prizes , and an outcome based on skill that is " determined predominantly by accumulated statistical results of sporting events , including any non @-@ participant 's individual performances in such sporting events " , to be unlawful wagering . The carve @-@ out was based on the language of an amendment proposed by Senator Richard Bryan to the failed Internet Gambling Prohibition Act . 
 The act itself does not define unlawful internet wagering , and expressly refrains from altering the legality of any underlying conduct other than funds transfers , meaning that state law remains binding . It also depends on banks to act as enforcers of the prohibitions . Congressman Jim Leach , who authored the <unk> , explained that the fantasy sports carve @-@ out was meant to relieve the burden of enforcement of the act by banks , nor cover the present @-@ day daily fantasy industry , and that " it is sheer chutzpah for a fantasy sports company to cite the law as a legal basis for existing " . 
 = = = Self @-@ imposed restrictions = = = 
 Daily fantasy services have historically blocked residents of Arizona , Iowa , Louisiana , Montana and Washington from participating in paid games , under a presumption that DFS is illegal in these states due to the strictness of their gambling laws . However , a November 2015 investigation by The New York Times found that these <unk> restrictions could easily be circumvented using anonymous proxies , and it was estimated that in 2014 , DraftKings had still collected $ 484 @,@ 897 in entry fees from players in the five states where it had voluntarily asserted that DFS was illegal . These reports led to regulatory probes by investigators in the aforementioned states . Both websites have since implemented measures to block proxy users . 
 = = = Legal opinions and challenges = = = 
 Louisiana attempted to pass a law that would exempt fantasy sports from its anti @-@ online gambling laws , but the bill was defeated as the result of lobbying by both the Louisiana Family Forum ( which showed concerns that players could develop an addiction to daily fantasy games ) , and the Louisiana Video Gaming Association ( which felt that DFS would cannibalize the legal video poker industry , and needed to be highly regulated ) . 
 On October 15 , 2015 , the Nevada Gaming Control Board published a memorandum ruling that daily fantasy sports games were a form of sports wagering , and that DFS services must cease serving customers in the state of Nevada until they obtain a sports pool license . The Board felt that DFS fell under the state 's definitions of a " gambling game " and a " sports pool " , as they " [ accept ] wagers on sporting events or other events by any system or method of wagering " , including wagers on events occurring during a sporting event ( props ) , combinations of multiple events occurring within an event ( parlays ) , and against the performance of other players , with " rake @-@ offs " taken by the operator on each wager ( defined as a " percentage game " under Nevada law ) . In further support of its argument , the memorandum cited Jason Robins ' comments on Reddit that described DraftKings using gambling @-@ oriented terminology ; the board stated that its classification was " consistent with how operators of certain daily fantasy sports describe themselves " . 
 On December 23 , 2015 , Illinois Attorney General Lisa Madigan ruled that daily fantasy sports were a form of unlawful gambling under state law . Madigan determined that in DFS , the players are not the " actual contestants " in a contest of skill , but the athletes themselves , meaning that " persons whose wagers depend upon how particular , selected athletes perform in actual sporting events stand in no different stead than persons who wager on the outcome of any sporting event in which they are not participants . " DraftKings and FanDuel filed lawsuits against the Attorney General the following day , seeking a court opinion on the matter . The DraftKings lawsuit argued that the order " has set off a chain of events that — if unchecked — will unjustly destroy a legitimate industry . " The sites may continue to operate in the state , pending the result of court hearings . 
 On January 17 , 2016 , Attorney General of Texas Ken Paxton issued an opinion , stating that " it is prohibited gambling in Texas if you bet on the performance of a participant in a sporting event and the house takes a cut . " On the other hand , Paxton stated that traditional , season @-@ length fantasy sports were legal . Prior to the ruling , it was also reported that Gary Grief , executive director of the Texas Lottery , had been investigating ways of integrating DFS into the state lottery system , including attempts to pursue DraftKings as a partner for a proposed game which would have offered credit for the service as prizes . FanDuel ceased serving residents of Texas , but DraftKings filed a request for declaratory judgment on March 4 , 2016 , seeking clarification on the matter . 
 On January 27 , 2016 , at the request of Senator Rosalyn Baker , Attorney General of Hawaii Doug Chin issued an opinion that DFS could be illegal under Hawaii law , as it involves a wager on an event outside of the player 's control . He explained that " the technology may have changed , but the vice has not . " 
 On April 5 , 2016 , Attorney General of Alabama Luther Strange ruled that DFS was illegal under state law , and sent cease and desist notices to DraftKings and FanDuel ordering them to stop serving residents of Alabama by May 1 , 2016 . He argued that while picking players for a fantasy team is an activity of skill , player performance can vary , and Alabama law dictates that it is illegal to risk something of value on any game with an element of chance . 
 = = = = Legalization = = = = 
 In September 2015 , the state of Massachusetts tabled a bill exploring the possibility of allowing the Massachusetts Lottery to run online , skill @-@ based games , such as daily fantasy sports . On November 19 , 2015 , the government announced that it would allow daily fantasy sports services to operate within Massachusetts under proposed regulations , including the requirement for all players to be 21 and over , banning members of the professional sports industry from playing the games ( including athletes ) , and banning the marketing of the services in colleges and high schools . 
 On March 7 , 2016 , the state of Virginia passed legislation regulating " fantasy contests " , defined as skill @-@ based games with cash prizes that are based on the " accumulated statistical results of the performance of individuals " ; the law makes no reference to sports or DFS . Services must pay a $ 50 @,@ 000 registration fee , be restricted to those who are 18 and older , and be subject to yearly independent audits . The law was criticized for being broadly @-@ worded , with critics believing that it could feasibly apply to season @-@ length games or any similar activities , and that the required licensing fee adds a financial barrier for doing business in the state . 
 On May 10 , 2016 , it was reported that the U.S. House Subcommittee on Commerce , Manufacturing and Trade was planning to discuss the legal aspects of DFS in a hearing . 
 = = = = New York ruling and lawsuit = = = = 
 On November 10 , 2015 , Attorney General of New York State Eric Schneiderman issued a cease @-@ and @-@ desist order to DraftKings and FanDuel , arguing that DFS was illegal under state law ( which specifies that games where players " risk something of value " and do not have " control or influence " over the outcome , are gambling ) , and ordering the two services to cease serving residents of New York . He stated that DFS " wagers " represented " a wager on a ' contest of chance ' where winning or losing depends on numerous elements of chance to a ' material degree ' " . He characterized the DFS industry as being a " massive , multi @-@ billion @-@ dollar scheme intended to evade the law and fleece sports fans across the country " , causing the " same public health and economic problems associated with gambling , particularly for populations prone to gambling addiction and individuals who are unprepared to sustain losses , lured by the promise of easy money . " 
 In response , DraftKings and FanDuel filed lawsuits against the state of New York on November 13 , arguing that their games were one of skill , they had been denied due process due to the Attorney General 's abruptness , that he does not have the power to make such a ruling , and that Schneiderman engaged in tortious interference by sending cease and desist notices to their payment processors . On November 16 , the two services tried to request a temporary restraining order to prevent Schneiderman from enforcing the cease @-@ and @-@ desist , but a state judge declared their request to be premature . Following the hearing , a spokesperson for the Attorney General declared that he could file a formal lawsuit against the two sites " as soon as tomorrow " . The same day , state senator Michael <unk> introduced a bill that would explicitly classify daily fantasy sports as a game of skill . 
 On November 17 , 2015 , the Attorney General filed a request for a temporary injunction to force DraftKings and FanDuel to cease serving customers in the state of New York . In the filing , Schneiderman argued that DFS was merely a " re @-@ branding " of sports betting , and in response to claims that DFS constitutes a game of skill , he argued that " a few good players in a poker tournament may rise to the top based on their skill ; but the game is still gambling . " Schneiderman also acknowledged that the two services had " basic compliance issues " ( alluding to the inside information scandal ) , had associated themselves with gambling @-@ oriented entities , and that DraftKings had accepted entry fees from users in states where it argued that DFS was illegal . The Attorney General also issued a subpoena for information from Yahoo ! in regards to its own daily fantasy offerings . FanDuel stated that it would comply with the order and restrict participation by residents of New York , while DraftKings stated that it would continue to serve them , arguing that Schneiderman 's decision was based on an " incomplete understanding of the facts about how our business operates and a fundamental misinterpretation and misapplication of the law " . 
 During hearings on November 25 , 2015 , Judge Manuel J. Mendez disputed assertions by the services that a player 's choice of athletes represents " control or influence " over the outcome , stating that players are ultimately " relying on someone else 's skill " to determine an outcome . On December 11 , 2015 , the temporary injunction was granted , forbidding DraftKings and FanDuel from " accepting entry fees , wagers or bets " from residents of New York state . <unk> argued that " the payment of an ' entry fee ' as high as $ 10 @,@ 600 on one or more contests daily could certainly be deemed risking ' something of value ' . " He also ruled that the UIGEA " has no corresponding authority under New York State law " . However , <unk> granted a temporary stay following requests for an appeal . On December 31 , 2015 — prior to an appeals court on whether they could continue to operate during the lawsuit , the Attorney General amended the lawsuit to demand that the two companies pay restitution — including the return of all money collected from customers in New York State . Schneiderman also acknowledged the services ' deceptive advertising practices , such as " convoluted " first deposit bonuses . 
 On January 11 , 2016 , DraftKings ' and FanDuel 's stay was granted , meaning that they could continue to serve New York residents , pending the outcome of the appeal . However , later that month , <unk> announced that it would no longer provide its payment processing services to the DFS industry , and in early @-@ February 2016 , Citigroup announced that it would no longer process payments for DraftKings and FanDuel made by residents of New York State , " pending a final decision by the courts " . 
 The Boston Globe believed that a ruling on the legality of DFS in New York State would have industry @-@ wide implications , as it is one of the largest markets for these services . Writing for The New Yorker , James Surowiecki believed that it was hypocritical for the state of New York to campaign against daily fantasy sports — which , in an op @-@ ed , the Attorney General classified as a " particularly pernicious " activity , as the state already sponsors and / or endorses other forms of legal gambling based purely on chance rather than a mix of chance and skill , such as the state lottery , casinos , and horse racing . Surowiecki argued that " given the absence of a good argument for why daily fantasy should be illegal in New York , while the lottery and racetrack betting and casinos are not , the best strategy that DraftKings and FanDuel could pursue might be to get the State Legislature to eliminate the inconsistency and explicitly legalize them . " 
 On March 21 , 2016 , the Attorney General announced a partial settlement of its lawsuit , under which DraftKings and FanDuel agreed to cease offering paid games in the state of New York , and abide by the result of an upcoming appeals court hearing . The hearings , which would determine whether the services would have to pay restitution , were tentatively scheduled for September 2016 — assuming that legislation legalizing daily fantasy sports was not passed by then . DraftKings and FanDuel spokespersons stated that the companies were working with local officials and supporting legislation to legalize DFS under state law . This settlement does not address the false advertising claims , which are still being pursued . The next day , Yahoo announced that it would voluntarily comply with the settlement and also cease offering paid games in the state of New York . 
 On the early morning of June 18 , 2016 , the New York State senate approved legislation to legalize daily fantasy sports . Daily fantasy providers will be required to pay 15 @.@ 5 % of their annual revenue to the New York Lottery 's education fund in order to serve customers in the state . 
 = = = League policies = = = 
 The NCAA considers all paid fantasy games — including daily fantasy — to fall under its prohibition of sports wagering by student athletes , punishable by ineligibility to participate in NCAA @-@ sanctioned athletics for one year . Advertising for daily fantasy services are also forbidden from being broadcast during telecasts of the NCAA 's tournaments . In August 2015 , the NCAA and a group of ten conferences jointly campaigned against daily fantasy games featuring college sports , asserting that DFS is inconsistent with the NCAA 's policies and values . The SEC had discussions with its broadcast partners in an attempt to discourage the advertising of daily fantasy games during its telecasts , while both Big Ten Network and Pac @-@ 12 Network prohibited advertising for daily fantasy games involving college sports . On December 9 , 2015 , it was reported that ESPN had similarly agreed not to air advertising for daily fantasy services during telecasts of the College Football Playoff . On March 31 , 2016 , DraftKings and FanDuel jointly agreed to stop offering daily fantasy college sports following the conclusion of the 2016 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . 
 The NFL does not outright ban participation in paid or daily fantasy sports games by its players and staff , but does restrict how much one may win in such games . 
 The PGA Tour prohibits its players from participation in paid DFS games involving golf , or endorsing DFS companies . 
 = M @-@ 52 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 52 is a north – south state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan . The southern terminus is on the Ohio border , where it continues as State Route 109 ( SR 109 ) . The highway passes through communities like Adrian , where it intersects US Highway 223 ( US 223 ) , Chelsea and Webberville along its 127 @.@ 3 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 204 @.@ 9 km ) course . It crosses some major rivers , including the River Raisin and the Shiawassee . The section of the highway between M @-@ 50 and Manchester was built as a limited @-@ access highway . M @-@ 52 's northern terminus is at M @-@ 46 , nine miles ( 14 km ) west of Saginaw . 
 Adrian previously converted their downtown streets to one @-@ way traffic between 1950 and 1973 . The traffic pattern created an unusual arrangement in the routings of the two state highways downtown . Southbound M @-@ 52 followed Winter Street , which also carried both eastbound and westbound directions of the US 223 business loop . These streets carried both highways around the downtown business district in this arrangement until November 2009 . 
 M @-@ 52 is an original state trunkline highway , dating to the 1919 formation of the system . Other segments of the modern routing were designated M @-@ 92 and M @-@ 47 at the time . Extensions to M @-@ 52 supplanted M @-@ 92 completely and M @-@ 47 partially along their routings . These extensions completed the modern M @-@ 52 routing in the late 1960s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 52 starts at the Ohio state line as Adrian Highway in Fairfield Township , Lenawee County , where it is the continuation of SR 109 into Michigan . The highway runs north to Adrian where it intersects US Highway 223 ( US 223 ) at the city border with Madison Township . As the highway crosses the city line , it is concurrently designated Business US 223 ( Bus . US 223 ) along Main Street into downtown Adrian . Bus . US 223 / M @-@ 52 intersects Beecher Street , which carries M @-@ 34 to the latter 's eastern terminus in Adrian . After Beecher , Main Street turns north @-@ northeast into the downtown area . 
 In downtown Adrian , M @-@ 52 runs north along Main Street to Church Street . Since November 2009 , the one @-@ way streets were converted back to two @-@ way functionality . Both directions of M @-@ 52 now turn east along Church , then north along Broad Street . At Front Street , traffic is diverted west back to Main Street . Continuing north out of downtown Adrian , M @-@ 52 follows Main Street over the South Branch of the River Raisin and out of the city limits , where it once again becomes Adrian Highway . The highway curves from running north @-@ northeast back to due north . West of the city of Tecumseh , the trunkline intersects M @-@ 50 . M @-@ 52 continues north as a limited @-@ access highway . Access to and from the highway is limited to select cross roads only . Just south of the county line , the highway intersects with US 12 before crossing into Washtenaw County . 
 The limited @-@ access section of M @-@ 52 continues north through western Washtenaw County , where it ends in Manchester . M @-@ 52 turns west along Austin and City roads into the village . The trunkline continues along the banks of the north branch of the River Raisin on Riverside Drive before turning north out of town . Just south of Chelsea , M @-@ 52 crosses Interstate 94 ( I @-@ 94 ) . The highway continues through downtown Chelsea and turns northwesterly through the Waterloo State Recreation Area in the northwesternmost part of the county . The highway clips the corner of Jackson County , running for almost 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) through Waterloo Township before crossing into Ingham County south of Stockbridge . 
 M @-@ 52 joins M @-@ 106 south of Stockbridge , and the two highways run together into the village . In downtown , M @-@ 106 turns east and M @-@ 52 turns west before heading north out of town . At the Stockbridge – White Oak township line , M @-@ 52 joins M @-@ 36 which follows the townships ' common border . The two highways run concurrently north into White Oak Township before M @-@ 36 turns west , ending the concurrency . In western Webberville , M @-@ 52 passes under I @-@ 96 and merges with M @-@ 43 at the latter 's eastern terminus . The two highways run north to , and turn west along , Grand River Avenue . At Perry Road , M @-@ 52 turns back north out of the village . The trunkline continues north into Shiawassee County and runs through Perry before crossing I @-@ 69 . Continuing north , M @-@ 52 curves northeasterly into downtown Owosso intersecting M @-@ 21 west of M @-@ 71 's western terminus . M @-@ 52 continues northward parallel to the Shiawassee River into Saginaw County . 
 The trunkline runs through the community of Oakley before intersecting M @-@ 57 west of Chesaning . North of Chesaning , M @-@ 52 angles to the northeast into and through St. Charles , crossing the Shiawassee River west of the Shiawassee National Wildlife Refuge . The northern terminus of M @-@ 52 is an intersection with M @-@ 46 west of Saginaw in Thomas Township . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 52 was first designated by July 1 , 1919 . The original routing started at the Ohio state line and ran north through Adrian to M @-@ 50 much as it does today . It turned east along M @-@ 50 into Tecumseh and then turned north to Clinton where it terminated . The remainder of the modern highway routing is either not part of the state trunkline system , or it is parts of other highways at this time , M @-@ 92 or M @-@ 47 . In 1954 , M @-@ 92 was extended southward to end in Clinton at the same intersection with US 112 where M @-@ 52 terminated . By July 1 , 1960 , M @-@ 92 's southern end was shifted westward , terminating west of Clinton at US 112 on a new roadway south of Manchester . M @-@ 52 was extended around 1962 north between M @-@ 50 and US 12 ( the former US 112 ) west of Tecumseh and Clinton . This extension ended at M @-@ 92 's terminus with US 12 . M @-@ 52 was then extended north supplanting the M @-@ 92 designation in its entirety . M @-@ 52 at this time runs north from the Ohio state line to Millville in southwestern Ingham County . In the late 1960s , Stockbridge Road between Webberville and Stockbridge was upgraded to state highway standards and uploaded from the county to the state . This construction was shown on the 1969 state map . When it was completed later that year , M @-@ 52 was extended northward a second time , to I @-@ 96 outside of Webberville . Where Stockbridge Road crossed I @-@ 96 , M @-@ 52 was continued north , supplanting M @-@ 47 through Webberville and north to the junction with M @-@ 46 west of Saginaw . This designation change shortened M @-@ 47 to its current southern terminus in Saginaw Township . 
 In downtown Adrian , the highways previously split into an uncommon arrangement of one @-@ way streets . This arrangement was similar to a traffic circle in how the traffic was routed through the central business district on Church , Broad , Front and Winter streets . The first one @-@ way pairing started on Main Street at the intersection with Winter Street . Northbound traffic continued on Main Street , while southbound traffic was routed along Winter Street . At Church Street , westbound Bus . US 223 / northbound M @-@ 52 turned east for a block on Church and then north onto Broad Street . Then the highway designations continued on Broad Street three blocks north to Front Street , passing to the east of the downtown businesses . The designations were then routed west along Front Street . At Main Street , M @-@ 52 turned back north again as a two @-@ way street . In the opposite direction , southbound M @-@ 52 traffic was diverted from Main west on Front Street . Front Street west of Main Street carried southbound M @-@ 52 and westbound Bus . US 223 traffic one block west to Winter Street , which then turned down Winter . Westbound Bus . US 223 traffic turned west along Maumee Street while eastbound Bus . US 223 followed southbound M @-@ 52 down Winter to Main Street . This arrangement was ended in November 2009 when the City of Adrian converted all of the one @-@ way streets to two @-@ way traffic . Downtown streets had been converted to one @-@ way traffic between 1950 and 1973 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Sigeberht of East Anglia = 
 Sigeberht of East Anglia ( also known as Saint Sigebert ) , ( Old English : <unk> ) was a saint and a king of East Anglia , the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom which today includes the English counties of Norfolk and Suffolk . He was the first English king to receive a Christian baptism and education before his succession and the first to abdicate in order to enter the monastic life . The principal source for Sigeberht is Bede 's Ecclesiastical History of the English People , which was completed in the 730s . 
 Sigeberht was probably either a younger son of Rædwald of East Anglia , or his step @-@ son from Rædwald 's marriage to a pagan princess from the kingdom of Essex . Nothing is known of his life before he was forced into exile in Gaul , which was possibly done in order to ensure that Rædwald 's own descendants ruled the kingdom . After his step @-@ brother Eorpwald 's assassination in about 627 , Sigeberht returned to East Anglia and ( perhaps in the aftermath of a military campaign ) became king , ruling jointly with Ecgric , who may have been either a son of Rædwald 's , or his nephew . 
 During Sigeberht 's reign the cause of Christianity in East Anglia was advanced greatly , even though his co @-@ ruler Ecgric probably remained a pagan . Alliances were strengthened between the Christian kingdoms of Kent , Northumbria and East Anglia . Sigeberht himself played an important part in the establishment of the Christian faith in his kingdom : Saint Felix arrived in East Anglia to assist him in establishing his episcopal see at Dommoc , he started a school for teaching Latin and he granted the Irish monk Saint Fursey a monastery site at Cnobheresburg ( possibly Burgh Castle ) . He eventually abdicated his power to Ecgric and retired to his monastery at Beodricesworth . At an unknown date , East Anglia was attacked by a Mercian army led by its king , Penda . Ecgric and the East Anglians appealed to Sigeberht to lead them in battle , but he refused and had to be dragged from his monastery to the battlefield . He refused to bear arms during the battle , during which both kings were slain and the East Anglian army was destroyed . 
 = = Family background , exile , conversion and education = = 
 Sigeberht ruled the kingdom of East Anglia ( Old English : <unk> Engla <unk> ) , a small independent Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom that comprised what are now the English counties of Norfolk and Suffolk and perhaps the eastern part of the Cambridgeshire Fens . 
 It is not known when Sigeberht was born and nothing is known of his life before he was exiled from East Anglia prior to becoming king , as few records have survived from this period of English history . The most reliable source for Sigeberht 's background and career is Bede 's Ecclesiastical History of the English People ( produced in 731 ) , in which Bede stated that Sigeberht was the brother of Eorpwald and the son of Rædwald , who ruled the kingdom of East Anglia from about 599 to 624 , but William of Malmesbury described him as Rædwald 's stepson . The stepson theory is strengthened by the fact that the name Sigeberht is without comparison in the East Anglian Wuffingas dynasty , but closely resembles the naming fashions of the East Saxon royal house . If this identification is correct ( and Charles Cawley warns that it should be treated with scepticism ) , Rædwald 's wife had previously been married to an East Saxon prince or ruler . Rædwald 's own principal heir was Rægenhere ( a youth of warrior age in 616 , when he was slain in battle ) and his second heir was Eorpwald , slain by the heathen Ricberht in about 627 . ( There is no ancient record that <unk> was a son of Rædwald 's , nor that he was a king . ) 
 Rædwald was personally converted and baptised before 616 and a Christian altar existed in his temple , but his son Eorpwald was not himself a convert when he succeeded Rædwald in about 624 . Since it is known that Rædwald 's wife ( who was Sigeberht 's mother ) did not become a Christian , Sigeberht must have received limited encouragement to convert to Christianity before being sent to Gaul and remaining there as an exile for many years during the lifetime of Eorpwald , " while fleeing from the enmity of Rædwald " , as Bede reports . His exile supports the stepson theory , if Rædwald was protecting Eorpwald 's succession against a possible claim by a son who was not of the Wuffingas line . 
 Whilst living in Gaul as an exile , Sigeberht was converted and baptized and became a devout Christian and a man of learning . He was strongly impressed by the religious institutions and schools for the study of reading and writing which he found during his long exile . 
 = = King of the East Angles = = 
 = = = Accession = = = 
 After an interregnum prompted by Eorpwald 's assassination , Sigeberht returned from Gaul to become ruler of the East Angles . It is likely that he gained the kingdom by military means , because his prowess as a commander was later remembered . During his reign , part of the kingdom was governed by Ecgric his ' kinsman ' , a relationship described by the Latin term cognatus . This may mean that Ecgric was a son of Rædwald . However , the historian Steven Plunkett is amongst those that consider Ecgric to be the same person as Æthelric , named in the East Anglian tally ( in the Anglian collection ) as a son of Eni , Rædwald 's brother . Whoever the pagan Ecgric was , Sigeberht had equal or senior power while he ruled , because the influence of his religious patronage was felt throughout his kingdom . 
 Sigeberht 's Christian conversion may have been a decisive factor in his achieving royal power , since at that time Edwin of Northumbria ( 616 – 632 or 633 ) was the senior English king and he and Eadbald , who ruled Kent , were Christian . Eadbald certainly had contacts with the Frankish rulers . After Dagobert succeeded <unk> II in Francia in 628 , Sigeberht 's emergence helped to strengthen the English conversion upon which Edwin 's power rested . Sigeberht is likely to have encouraged the conversion of Ecgric , if he was not already Christian . Edwin 's encouragement took shape in the marriage of his grand @-@ niece Hereswitha , sister of Hilda of Whitby , to Æthelric , Rædwald 's nephew . Hereswith and Hilda were under Edwin 's protection and were baptised with him in 626 . 
 = = = Foundation of the East Anglian bishopric = = = 
 Bede relates that the East Anglian apostle Saint Felix came to England from Burgundy as a missionary bishop and was sent by Saint Honorius , Archbishop of Canterbury , to assist in establishing Christianity in Sigeberht 's kingdom . William of Malmesbury had the later story that Felix accompanied Sigeberht to East Anglia . In either case , this dates Sigeberht 's accession to around 629 – 630 , because Felix was bishop for seventeen years , his successor Thomas for five and Thomas ' successor <unk> Boniface for seventeen – and <unk> died in around 669 . Sigeberht established the bishop 's seat of his kingdom for Felix at Dommoc , claimed variously for Dunwich or Walton , Felixstowe ( both coastal sites in Suffolk ) . If the seat was at Walton ( as Rochester claimed during the 13th century ) , the site of Dommoc may have been within the precinct of a Roman fort which formerly stood there . 
 = = = Foundation of the East Anglian school = = = 
 Sigeberht secured the future of the Church in East Anglia when he established a school in his kingdom so that boys could be taught reading and writing in Latin , on the model that he had witnessed in Gaul . Felix assisted him by obtaining teachers of the kind who taught in Kent . According to the Life of Gregory the Great , Paulinus of York , who from 633 to 644 was the Bishop of Rochester in northern Kent , had been connected with Rædwald 's court during the exile of Edwin . 
 = = = Foundation of Cnobheresburg = = = 
 The allegiance of Felix to Canterbury determined the Roman basis of the East Anglian Church , influenced along continental lines , though Felix 's training in Burgundy may have been coloured by the teaching of the Irish missionary Saint Columbanus in Luxeuil . In around 633 , perhaps shortly before Saint Aidan was sent to Lindisfarne from Iona , the Irish royal hermit and missionary Saint Fursey came to East Anglia from the Athlone area , along with his priests and brethren . Sigeberht granted him a monastery site in an old Roman fort called Cnobheresburg , usually identified as Burgh Castle , near Great Yarmouth . Felix and Fursey both effected a large number of conversions and established many churches in Sigeberht 's kingdom . Bede records that Archbishop Honorius and Bishop Felix much admired the work of Saint Aidan of Lindisfarne and it is therefore likely that they also appreciated the tasks accomplished by Saint Fursey , whose community also lived according to the ascetic principles of Irish Christianity . 
 = = Abdication and martyrdom = = 
 At some point during his reign , Sigeberht abdicated his power to Ecgric and retired to lead a religious life within a monastery he had built for his own use . Bede does not name the location of Sigeberht 's monastery , but later sources name it as Beodricesworth , afterwards called Bury St Edmunds . If that identification is accepted , the likely site was in the original precinct of the mediaeval abbey at Bury St Edmunds , probably the ' worth ' or curtilage of <unk> after whom the place was originally named . The site occupied a strong position on the upper reaches of the Lark valley , which drains north @-@ west into the Great Fen through important early settlements at <unk> , <unk> , West Stow and others . This was a line of access towards Ely , where a foundation of Saint Augustine may already have existed , and towards Soham , where Saint Felix is thought to have founded a monastery . 
 At an unknown date , which may have been in the early 640s , East Anglia was attacked by a Mercian army and Ecgric was obliged to defend it with a much smaller force , though one that was not negligible . The East Angles appealed to Sigeberht to leave his monastery and lead them in battle , hoping that his presence and the memory of his former military exploits would encourage the army and make them less likely to flee . Sigeberht refused , saying that he had renounced his worldly kingdom and now lived only for the heavenly kingdom . However , he was dragged from the monastery to the battlefield where , unwilling to bear arms , he went into battle carrying only a staff . The Mercians were victorious and Sigeberht , Ecgric and many of the East Angles were slain and their army was routed . In this way Sigeberht became a Christian martyr . He is among the names of the kings who according to an ancient saying , were avenged by the slaying of Penda in 654 . 
 The Church that Sigeberht had done so much to establish in East Anglia survived for two centuries , enduring ' evil times ' ( such as the period when the kingdom was under attack by the armies of Penda of Mercia ) . It lasted continuously under a succession of bishops until the Danish Great Heathen Army invaded East Anglia in the 860s . 
 Lives of the English Saints , written by John Henry Newman in 1843 , is amongst the texts that gives Sigeberht 's feast day as being observed on 29 October . 
 = Mildred Lewis Rutherford = 
 Mildred Lewis " Miss Millie " Rutherford ( July 16 , 1851 – August 15 , 1928 ) was a prominent educator and author from Athens , Georgia . She served the Lucy Cobb Institute , as its head and in other capacities , for over forty years , and oversaw the addition of the Seney @-@ Stovall Chapel to the school . Heavily involved in many organizations , she became the historian general of the United Daughters of the Confederacy ( UDC ) , and a speech given for the UDC was the first by a woman to be recorded in the Congressional Record . She was a prolific non @-@ fiction writer . Also known for her oratory , Rutherford was distinctive in dressing as a southern belle for her speeches . She held strong pro @-@ Confederacy , proslavery views and opposed women 's suffrage . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Family background = = = 
 Mildred Rutherford was born July 16 , 1851 , in Athens , Georgia ; she was the daughter of Laura Cobb Rutherford ( Howell and Thomas 's sister ) and Williams Rutherford , a professor of mathematics at the University of Georgia . Mildred Rutherford was the granddaughter of John Addison Cobb , whose involvement in agriculture ( he owned a plantation with 209 slaves by 1840 ) , the Georgia Railroad , and real estate made him " one of the area 's wealthiest men " . She was the niece of John 's sons Howell Cobb , who served six terms as a Democratic Congressman and Speaker of the House for two years , and the lawyer Thomas R.R. Cobb , one of the founders of the University of Georgia School of Law – he " codified Georgia 's state laws " , " wrote the wartime state constitution of 1861 " , and was a prominent proslavery propagandist ; <unk> Cobb founded Lucy Cobb Institute in response to a letter that Laura Rutherford had sent anonymously to the local paper . 
 = = = Education and career = = = 
 Rutherford entered the Lucy Cobb Institute at the age of eight " in the school 's first session " . She was graduated from there at the age of sixteen in 1868 . 
 = = = = Educator = = = = 
 After teaching in Atlanta for eight years , Rutherford served as the principal of the Lucy Cobb Institute in Athens from 1880 to 1895 and lived in a house directly across the street until it burned c . 1926 , continuing to serve the school in various capacities for over forty years ( including several years again at its head " with the title of ' president ' signaling the school 's college @-@ level ambitions " ) . According to Sarah Case , 
 Rutherford took over a struggling institution and rebuilt it into one of the most prestigious schools for young women in Georgia . She immediately went to work improving its academic standards , beautifying the physical plant , and increasing enrollment . In agreeing to head the school , Rutherford had insisted that the all @-@ male board of directors cede to her its control of the budget and power to hire and fire staff . 
 She decided the students needed a chapel and had them write seeking funding for one . In 1881 , Nellie Stovall wrote " a beautiful and girlish letter " to George I. Seney , who responded with $ 10 @,@ 000 in funding ( and a challenge to the town for an additional $ 4 @,@ 000 ) for the structure , an octagonal red brick building called the Seney @-@ Stovall Chapel . 
 Case further describes Lucy Cobb under Rutherford 's direction : 
 Rutherford 's deep concern with propriety and feminine modesty should not obscure the fact that the school prepared women for more than traditional domestic roles . Lucy Cobb recognized that many of its alumnae would seek employment , and by teaching students marketable , and at the same time , respectable , skills , as well as genteel decorum and dress , Lucy Cobb created a new image of elite white single womanhood that combined aspects of the new woman and the southern belle , what I call the " new belle . " As early as 1885 , a Lucy Cobb commencement speaker argued that women ought to be allowed into more professions . 
 = = = = Orator and historian = = = = 
 Rutherford was an accomplished public speaker – she ofttimes dressed as a southern belle when orating – who addressed a great number of local organizations , including the YMCA , the Ladies Memorial Association ( for which she served as president ) , and the Athens chapter of the United Daughters of the Confederacy ( UDC ) , and in November 1912 addressed the national assembly of the UDC as their historian general . 
 She " became perhaps the best @-@ known amateur historian in the early twentieth century for her extensive writings and speeches , her historical journal , published from 1923 to 1927 , and her promotion of historical work among the UDC as that organization 's Historian General from 1911 to 1916 " . She gave " the first speech by a woman to be printed in the Congressional Record " in 1916 at a UDC convention . 
 " Miss Millie , " always a champion of southern traditions , was a woman of powerful personality , commanding presence , and fearlessly outspoken opinions ; she was known widely for the speeches she delivered in hoop skirts . For all her decorum , she seemed to enjoy the protracted battles over the plaster goats that stood at the end of the dormitory 's long veranda . The college boys periodically painted these animals in their school colors , red and black . At last they were broken when the boys attempted to hide them ; some of the former belles of Lucy Cobb still cherish pieces of the goats as souvenirs . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 In 1927 Rutherford became seriously ill . Late on Christmas night , as she convalesced , her house suffered a devastating fire , consuming many of her personal papers and belongings , including " most of her private collection of Confederate artifacts " . She died on August 15 , 1928 , and was interred in Oconee Hill Cemetery , in East Hill , one of the two original sections of the cemetery . Her great niece Mildred <unk> was named in her honor and became a well @-@ known journalist , one of the first in Georgia , and a nationally syndicated columnist . 
 = = Views = = 
 Rutherford was Baptist with a strong faith and expressed a " deep preoccupation with propriety and morality " in her textbooks , criticizing " authors who openly portrayed sexuality or themselves lived in ways Rutherford found immoral " . She lauded the works of Southern writers and female writers . 
 According to University of Georgia historian Ann E. Marshall , she was a " tireless advocate of the ' Lost Cause ' version of southern history " ( referring to the Lost Cause of the Confederacy ) . Goals of her writing included " establishing the South 's contribution to United States history , legitimizing secession , and idealizing the antebellum plantation " , and she defended American slavery , thinking its only problem was the burden it put upon the white slaveholders . She viewed " true history " – the way she saw , defined , and proselytized it – as a potential common ground between North and South , and also believed it to be a potent political weapon in support of the causes she espoused . She was willing to alter the historical record to make her point -- in a speech in Dallas in 1916 she claimed that " the negroes in the South were never called slaves . That term came in with the abolition crusade , " even though her own state of Georgia used the word " slaves " in its official Declaration of Causes of Secession 
 In 1914 , she joined the Georgia Association Opposed to Woman Suffrage and became a " vocal opponent " of women 's suffrage and the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution , which was ratified on August 18 , 1920 . She viewed suffrage as " not a step toward equality , but rather a way of robbing women of the only power they truly held – that of feminine influence and persuasion within their families . Rutherford never reconciled this view with the fact that she herself was one of Georgia 's most publicly active and well @-@ known women of her time " . Her opposition was " formidable " : Dolly Blount Lamar and Rutherford headed the organization , and in 1919 this " conservative state " became the nation 's first to reject the amendment . Case asserts that while " Rutherford reserved her strongest resistance for the suffrage amendment " , she " opposed all constitutional amendments , including prohibition , despite her anti @-@ alcohol sentiments , on the basis of limiting federal power " . 
 = = Selected writings = = 
 Mildred Lewis Rutherford wrote 29 historically significant books and pamphlets . These were widely read . Among them are : 
 Rutherford , Mildred Lewis ( 1890 ) . English Authors : a hand @-@ book of English literature from Chaucer to living writers . Atlanta : The Constitution Book & Job Print . 
 Rutherford , Mildred Lewis ( 1894 ) . American authors : a hand @-@ book of American literature from early colonial to living writers . Atlanta : The Franklin Printing and Publishing Company . 
 Rutherford , Mildred Lewis ( 1906 ) . The South in History and Literature : a handbook of Southern authors from the Settlement of Jamestown , 1607 , to living writers . Atlanta : The Franklin @-@ Turner Company . 
 Rutherford , Mildred Lewis ( November 21 , 1912 ) . Address delivered by Miss Mildred Lewis Rutherford , historian general , United Daughters of the Confederacy . Thirteen periods of United States history . New Orleans , La . Retrieved January 23 , 2012 @.@ at Internet archive . 
 Rutherford , Mildred Lewis ( 1906 ) . French authors : a hand @-@ book of French literature . Froissart <unk> writers . Atlanta : The Franklin Printing and Publishing Company . 
 Rutherford , Mildred Lewis ( 1916 ) . Four Addresses . Paul Hunter Books , Arranged and printed by The Mildred Rutherford Historical Circle . 
 Rutherford , Mildred Lewis ( 1920 , reprinted with new material 1998 ) . Truths of History : A Historical Perspective of the Civil War From the Southern Viewpoint . Athens , Georgia ( original ) ; Atlanta , Georgia ( reprint ) : Southern Lion Books , Inc . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ 7 @.@ at Internet Archive 
 Rutherford , Mildred Lewis , The South Must Have Her Rightful Place in History , Athens , Georgia , 1923 . 
 Rutherford , Mildred Lewis ( 1926 ) . Georgia : the thirteenth colony . Athens , Georgia : McGregor . OCLC <unk> . 
 = = = Endnotes = = = 
 = Battle of the Coral Sea = 
 The Battle of the Coral Sea , fought during 4 – 8 May 1942 , was a major naval battle in the Pacific Theater of World War II between the Imperial Japanese Navy and naval and air forces from the United States and Australia . The battle was the first action in which aircraft carriers engaged each other , as well as the first in which neither side 's ships sighted or fired directly upon the other . 
 In an attempt to strengthen their defensive positioning for their empire in the South Pacific , Japanese forces decided to invade and occupy Port Moresby in New Guinea and Tulagi in the southeastern Solomon Islands . The plan to accomplish this , called Operation MO , involved several major units of Japan 's Combined Fleet , including two fleet carriers and a light carrier to provide air cover for the invasion fleets , under the overall command of Japanese Admiral Shigeyoshi Inoue . The US learned of the Japanese plan through signals intelligence and sent two United States Navy carrier task forces and a joint Australian @-@ American cruiser force , under the overall command of American Admiral Frank J. Fletcher , to oppose the Japanese offensive . 
 On 3 – 4 May , Japanese forces successfully invaded and occupied Tulagi , although several of their supporting warships were surprised and sunk or damaged by aircraft from the US fleet carrier Yorktown . Now aware of the presence of US carriers in the area , the Japanese fleet carriers advanced towards the Coral Sea with the intention of finding and destroying the Allied naval forces . Beginning on 7 May , the carrier forces from the two sides exchanged airstrikes over two consecutive days . The first day , the US sank the Japanese light carrier Shōhō , while the Japanese sank a US destroyer and heavily damaged a fleet oiler ( which was later scuttled ) . The next day , the Japanese fleet carrier Shōkaku was heavily damaged , the US fleet carrier Lexington was critically damaged ( and was scuttled as a result ) , and the Yorktown was damaged . With both sides having suffered heavy losses in aircraft and carriers damaged or sunk , the two fleets disengaged and retired from the battle area . Because of the loss of carrier air cover , Inoue recalled the Port Moresby invasion fleet , intending to try again later . 
 Although a tactical victory for the Japanese in terms of ships sunk , the battle would prove to be a strategic victory for the Allies for several reasons . The battle marked the first time since the start of the war that a major Japanese advance had been checked by the Allies . More importantly , the Japanese fleet carriers Shōkaku and Zuikaku – one damaged and the other with a depleted aircraft complement – were unable to participate in the Battle of Midway , which took place the following month , ensuring a rough parity in aircraft between the two adversaries and contributing significantly to the US victory in that battle . The severe losses in carriers at Midway prevented the Japanese from <unk> to invade Port Moresby from the ocean . Two months later , the Allies took advantage of Japan 's resulting strategic vulnerability in the South Pacific and launched the Guadalcanal Campaign that , along with the New Guinea Campaign , eventually broke Japanese defenses in the South Pacific and was a significant contributing factor to Japan 's ultimate defeat in World War II . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Japanese expansion = = = 
 On 7 December 1941 , using aircraft carriers , Japan attacked the U.S. Pacific fleet at Pearl Harbor , Hawaii . The attack destroyed or crippled most of the U.S. Pacific Fleet 's battleships and brought the United States into the war . In launching this war , Japanese leaders sought to neutralize the American fleet , seize territory rich in natural resources , and obtain strategic military bases to defend their far @-@ flung empire . At the same time that they were attacking Pearl Harbor , the Japanese attacked Malaya , causing Britain , Australia , and New Zealand to join the United States in the war against Japan . In the words of the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) Combined Fleet " Secret Order Number One " , dated 1 November 1941 , the goals of the initial Japanese campaigns in the impending war were to " ( eject ) British and American strength from the Netherlands Indies and the Philippines , ( and ) to establish a policy of autonomous self @-@ sufficiency and economic independence . " 
 To support these goals , during the first few months of 1942 , besides Malaya , Japanese forces attacked and successfully took control of the Philippines , Singapore , the Netherlands East Indies , Wake Island , New Britain , the Gilbert Islands , and Guam , while inflicting heavy losses on opposing Allied land , naval , and air forces . Japan planned to use these conquered territories to establish a perimeter defense for its empire from which it expected to employ attritional tactics to defeat or exhaust any Allied counterattacks . 
 Shortly after the war began , Japan 's Naval General Staff recommended an invasion of Northern Australia to prevent Australia from being used as a base to threaten Japan 's perimeter defenses in the South Pacific . The Imperial Japanese Army ( IJA ) , however , rejected the recommendation , stating that it did not have the forces or shipping capacity available to conduct such an operation . At the same time , Vice Admiral Shigeyoshi Inoue , commander of the IJN 's 4th Fleet ( also called the South Seas Force ) which consisted of most of the naval units in the South Pacific area , advocated the occupation of Tulagi in the southeastern Solomon Islands and Port Moresby in New Guinea , which would put northern Australia within range of Japanese land @-@ based aircraft . Inoue believed the capture and control of these locations would provide greater security and defensive depth for the major Japanese base at Rabaul on New Britain . The navy 's general staff and the IJA accepted Inoue 's proposal and promoted further operations , using these locations as supporting bases , to seize New Caledonia , Fiji , and Samoa and thereby cut the supply and communication lines between Australia and the United States . 
 In April 1942 , the army and navy developed a plan that was titled Operation MO . The plan called for Port Moresby to be invaded from the ocean and secured by 10 May . The plan also included the seizure of Tulagi on 2 – 3 May , where the navy would establish a seaplane base for potential air operations against Allied territories and forces in the South Pacific and to provide a base for reconnaissance aircraft . Upon the completion of MO , the navy planned to initiate Operation RY , using ships released from MO , to seize Nauru and Ocean Island for their phosphate deposits on 15 May . Further operations against Fiji , Samoa and New Caledonia ( Operation FS ) were to be planned once MO and RY were completed . Because of a damaging air attack by Allied land- and carrier @-@ based aircraft on Japanese naval forces invading the Lae @-@ Salamaua area in New Guinea in March , Inoue requested the Combined Fleet send carriers to provide air cover for the MO forces . Inoue was especially worried about Allied bombers stationed at air bases in Townsville and Cooktown , Australia , beyond the range of his own bombers located at Rabaul and Lae . 
 Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto , commander of Japan 's Combined Fleet , was concurrently planning an operation for June that he hoped would lure the U.S. Navy 's carriers , none of which had been damaged in the Pearl Harbor attack , into a decisive showdown in the central Pacific near Midway Atoll . In the meantime , however , Yamamoto detached some of his large warships , including two fleet carriers , a light carrier , a cruiser division , and two destroyer divisions , to support MO , and placed Inoue in charge of the naval portion of the operation . 
 = = = Allied response = = = 
 Unknown to the Japanese , the U.S. Navy , led by the Communication Security Section of the Office of Naval Communications , had for several years enjoyed some success with penetrating Japanese communication ciphers and codes . By March 1942 , the U.S. was able to decipher up to 15 % of the IJN 's Ro or Naval <unk> D code ( called the " JN @-@ 25B " code by the Americans ) which was used by the IJN for approximately half of its communications . By the end of April the Americans were reading up to 85 % of the signals broadcast in the Ro code . 
 In March 1942 , the U.S. first noticed mention of the MO operation in intercepted messages . On 5 April , the Americans intercepted an IJN message directing a carrier and other large warships to proceed to Inoue 's area of operations . On 13 April , the British deciphered an IJN message informing Inoue that the Fifth Carrier Division , consisting of the fleet carriers Shōkaku and Zuikaku , was en route to his command from Formosa via the main IJN base at Truk . The British passed the message to the Americans , along with their conclusion that Port Moresby was the likely target of MO . 
 Admiral Chester Nimitz , the new commander of Allied forces in the Pacific , and his staff discussed the deciphered messages and agreed that the Japanese were likely initiating a major operation in the Southwest Pacific in early May with Port Moresby as the probable target . The Allies regarded Port Moresby as a key base for a planned counteroffensive , under Douglas MacArthur , against Japanese forces in the southwest Pacific area . Nimitz 's staff also concluded that the Japanese operation might include carrier raids on Allied bases in Samoa and at Suva . Nimitz , after consultation with Admiral Ernest King , Commander in Chief of the United States Fleet , decided to contest the Japanese operation by sending all four of the Pacific fleet 's available aircraft carriers to the Coral Sea . By 27 April , further signals intelligence confirmed most of the details and targets of the MO and RY plans . 
 On 29 April , Nimitz issued orders that sent his four carriers and their supporting warships towards the Coral Sea . Task Force 17 ( TF 17 ) , commanded by Rear Admiral Fletcher and consisting of the carrier Yorktown , escorted by three cruisers and four destroyers and supported by a replenishment group of two oilers and two destroyers , was already in the South Pacific , having departed Tongatabu on 27 April en route to the Coral Sea . TF 11 , commanded by Rear Admiral Aubrey Fitch and consisting of the carrier Lexington with two cruisers and five destroyers , was between Fiji and New Caledonia . TF 16 , commanded by Vice Admiral William F. Halsey and including the carriers Enterprise and Hornet , had just returned to Pearl Harbor from the Doolittle Raid in the central Pacific . <unk> immediately departed but would not reach the South Pacific in time to participate in the battle . Nimitz placed Fletcher in command of Allied naval forces in the South Pacific area until Halsey arrived with TF 16 . Although the Coral Sea area was under MacArthur 's command , Fletcher and Halsey were directed to continue to report to Nimitz while in the Coral Sea area , not to MacArthur . 
 Based on intercepted radio traffic from TF 16 as it returned to Pearl Harbor , the Japanese assumed that all but one of the U.S. Navy 's carriers were in the central Pacific . The Japanese did not know the location of the remaining carrier , but did not expect an American carrier response to MO until the operation was well underway . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Prelude = = = 
 During late April , the Japanese submarines Ro @-@ 33 and Ro @-@ 34 reconnoitered the area where landings were planned . The submarines investigated Rossel Island and the Deboyne Group anchorage in the Louisiade Archipelago , Jomard Channel , and the route to Port Moresby from the east . They did not sight any Allied ships in the area and returned to Rabaul on 23 and 24 April respectively . 
 The Japanese Port Moresby Invasion Force , commanded by Rear Admiral <unk> Abe , included 11 transport ships carrying about 5 @,@ 000 soldiers from the IJA 's South Seas Detachment plus approximately 500 troops from the 3rd Kure Special Naval Landing Force ( SNLF ) . Escorting the transports was the Port Moresby Attack Force with one light cruiser and six destroyers under the command of Rear Admiral <unk> Kajioka . Abe 's ships departed Rabaul for the 840 nmi ( 970 mi ; 1 @,@ 560 km ) trip to Port Moresby on 4 May and were joined by Kajioka 's force the next day . The ships , proceeding at 8 kn ( 9 @.@ 2 mph ; 15 km / h ) , planned to transit the Jomard Channel in the Louisiades to pass around the southern tip of New Guinea to arrive at Port Moresby by 10 May . The Allied garrison at Port Moresby numbered around 5 @,@ 333 men , but only half of these were infantry and all were badly equipped and <unk> . 
 Leading the invasion of Tulagi was the Tulagi Invasion Force , commanded by Rear Admiral Kiyohide Shima , consisting of two minelayers , two destroyers , six minesweepers , two subchasers , and a transport ship carrying about 400 troops from the 3rd Kure SNLF . Supporting the Tulagi force was the Covering Group with the light carrier Shōhō , four heavy cruisers , and one destroyer , commanded by Rear Admiral Aritomo Gotō . A separate Cover Force ( sometimes referred to as the Support Group ) , commanded by Rear Admiral <unk> Marumo and consisting of two light cruisers , the seaplane tender Kamikawa Maru , and three gunboats , joined the Covering Group in providing distant protection for the Tulagi invasion . Once Tulagi was secured on 3 or 4 May , the Covering Group and Cover Force were to reposition to help screen the Port Moresby invasion . Inoue directed the MO operation from the cruiser Kashima , with which he arrived at Rabaul from Truk on 4 May . 
 Gotō 's force left Truk on 28 April , cut through the Solomons between Bougainville and Choiseul and took station near New Georgia Island . Marumo 's support group sortied from New Ireland on 29 April headed for Thousand Ships Bay , Santa Isabel Island , to establish a seaplane base on 2 May to support the Tulagi assault . Shima 's invasion force departed Rabaul on 30 April . 
 The Carrier Strike Force , with the carriers Zuikaku and Shōkaku , two heavy cruisers , and six destroyers , sortied from Truk on 1 May . The strike force was commanded by Vice Admiral Takeo Takagi ( flag on cruiser Myōkō ) , with Rear Admiral Chūichi Hara , on Zuikaku , in tactical command of the carrier air forces . The Carrier Strike Force was to proceed down the eastern side of the Solomon Islands and enter the Coral Sea south of Guadalcanal . Once in the Coral Sea , the carriers were to provide air cover for the invasion forces , eliminate Allied air power at Port Moresby , and intercept and destroy any Allied naval forces which entered the Coral Sea in response . 
 En route to the Coral Sea , Takagi 's carriers were to deliver nine Zero fighter aircraft to Rabaul . Bad weather during two attempts to make the delivery on 2 – 3 May compelled the aircraft to return to the carriers , stationed 240 nmi ( 280 mi ; 440 km ) from Rabaul , and one of the Zeros was forced to ditch in the ocean . In order to try to keep to the MO timetable , Takagi was forced to abandon the delivery mission after the second attempt and direct his force towards the Solomon Islands to refuel . 
 To give advance warning of the approach of any Allied naval forces , the Japanese sent submarines I @-@ 22 , I @-@ 24 , I @-@ 28 , and I @-@ 29 to form a scouting line in the ocean about 450 nmi ( 520 mi ; 830 km ) southwest of Guadalcanal . Fletcher 's forces , however , had entered the Coral Sea area before the submarines took station , and the Japanese were therefore unaware of their presence . Another submarine , I @-@ 21 , which was sent to scout around Nouméa , was attacked by Yorktown aircraft on 2 May . The submarine took no damage and apparently did not realize that it had been attacked by carrier aircraft . Ro @-@ 33 and Ro @-@ 34 were also deployed in an attempt to blockade Port Moresby , arriving off the town on 5 May . Neither submarine engaged any ships during the battle . 
 On the morning of 1 May , TF 17 and TF 11 united about 300 nmi ( 350 mi ; 560 km ) northwest of New Caledonia ( 16 ° 16 ′ S 162 ° 20 ′ E ) . Fletcher immediately detached <unk> to refuel from the oiler Tippecanoe , while TF 17 refueled from Neosho . TF 17 completed refueling the next day , but TF 11 reported that they would not be finished fueling until 4 May . Fletcher elected to take TF 17 northwest towards the Louisiades and ordered TF 11 to meet TF 44 , which was en route from Sydney and Nouméa , on 4 May once refueling was complete . TF 44 was a joint Australia – U.S. warship force under MacArthur 's command , led by Australian Rear Admiral John Crace and made up of the cruisers HMAS Australia , Hobart , and USS Chicago , along with three destroyers . Once it completed refueling TF 11 , Tippecanoe departed the Coral Sea to deliver its remaining fuel to Allied ships at Efate . 
 = = = Tulagi = = = 
 Early on 3 May , Shima 's force arrived off Tulagi and began disembarking the naval troops to occupy the island . Tulagi was undefended : the small garrison of Australian commandos and a Royal Australian Air Force reconnaissance unit evacuated just before Shima 's arrival . The Japanese forces immediately began construction of a seaplane and communications base . Aircraft from Shōhō covered the landings until early afternoon , when Gotō 's force turned towards Bougainville to refuel in preparation to support the landings at Port Moresby . 
 At 17 : 00 on 3 May , Fletcher was notified that the Japanese Tulagi invasion force had been sighted the day before , approaching the southern Solomons . Unknown to Fletcher , TF 11 completed refueling that morning ahead of schedule and was only 60 nmi ( 69 mi ; 110 km ) east of TF 17 , but was unable to communicate its status because of Fletcher 's orders to maintain radio silence . TF 17 changed course and proceeded at 27 kn ( 31 mph ; 50 km / h ) towards Guadalcanal to launch airstrikes against the Japanese forces at Tulagi the next morning . 
 On 4 May , from a position 100 nmi ( 120 mi ; 190 km ) south of Guadalcanal ( 11 ° 10 ′ S 158 ° 49 ′ E ) , a total of 60 aircraft from TF 17 launched three consecutive strikes against Shima 's forces off Tulagi . Yorktown 's aircraft surprised Shima 's ships and sank the destroyer Kikuzuki ( 09 ° 07 ′ S 160 ° 12 ′ E ) and three of the minesweepers , damaged four other ships , and destroyed four seaplanes which were supporting the landings . The Americans lost one dive bomber and two fighters in the strikes , but all of the aircrew were eventually rescued . After recovering its aircraft late in the evening of 4 May , TF17 retired towards the south . In spite of the damage suffered in the carrier strikes , the Japanese continued construction of the seaplane base and began flying reconnaissance missions from Tulagi by 6 May . 
 Takagi 's Carrier Striking Force was refueling 350 nmi ( 400 mi ; 650 km ) north of Tulagi when it received word of Fletcher 's strike on 4 May . Takagi terminated refueling , headed southeast , and sent scout planes to search east of the Solomons , believing that the American carriers were in that area . Since no Allied ships were in that area , the search planes found nothing . 
 = = = Air searches and decisions = = = 
 At 08 : 16 on 5 May , TF 17 rendezvoused with TF 11 and TF 44 at a predetermined point 320 nmi ( 370 mi ; 590 km ) south of Guadalcanal ( 15 ° S 160 ° E ) . At about the same time , four Grumman F4F Wildcat fighters from Yorktown intercepted a Kawanishi H6K reconnaissance flying boat from the Yokohama Air Group of the 25th Air Flotilla based at the Shortland Islands and shot it down 11 nmi ( 13 mi ; 20 km ) from TF 11 . The aircraft failed to send a report before it crashed , but when it didn 't return to base the Japanese correctly assumed that it had been shot down by carrier aircraft . 
 A message from Pearl Harbor notified Fletcher that radio intelligence deduced the Japanese planned to land their troops at Port Moresby on 10 May and their fleet carriers would likely be operating close to the invasion convoy . Armed with this information , Fletcher directed TF 17 to refuel from Neosho . After the refueling was completed on 6 May , he planned to take his forces north towards the Louisiades and do battle on 7 May . 
 In the meantime , Takagi 's carrier force steamed down the east side of the Solomons throughout the day on 5 May , turned west to pass south of San Cristobal ( Makira ) , and entered the Coral Sea after transiting between Guadalcanal and Rennell Island in the early morning hours of 6 May . Takagi commenced refueling his ships 180 nmi ( 210 mi ; 330 km ) west of Tulagi in preparation for the carrier battle he expected would take place the next day . 
 On 6 May , Fletcher absorbed TF 11 and TF 44 into TF 17 . Believing the Japanese carriers were still well to the north near Bougainville , Fletcher continued to refuel . Reconnaissance patrols conducted from the American carriers throughout the day failed to locate any of the Japanese naval forces , because they were located just beyond scouting range . 
 At 10 : 00 , a Kawanishi reconnaissance flying boat from Tulagi sighted TF 17 and notified its headquarters . Takagi received the report at 10 : 50 . At that time , Takagi 's force was about 300 nmi ( 350 mi ; 560 km ) north of Fletcher , near the maximum range for his carrier aircraft . Takagi , whose ships were still refueling , was not yet ready to engage in battle . He concluded , based on the sighting report , TF 17 was heading south and increasing the range . Furthermore , Fletcher 's ships were under a large , low @-@ hanging overcast which Takagi and Hara felt would make it difficult for their aircraft to find the American carriers . Takagi detached his two carriers with two destroyers under Hara 's command to head towards TF 17 at 20 kn ( 23 mph ; 37 km / h ) in order to be in position to attack at first light the next day while the rest of his ships completed refueling . 
 American B @-@ 17 bombers based in Australia and staging through Port Moresby attacked the approaching Port Moresby invasion forces , including Gotō 's warships , several times during the day on 6 May without success . MacArthur 's headquarters radioed Fletcher with reports of the attacks and the locations of the Japanese invasion forces . MacArthur 's fliers ' reports of seeing a carrier ( Shōhō ) about 425 nmi ( 489 mi ; 787 km ) northwest of TF17 further convinced Fletcher fleet carriers were accompanying the invasion force . 
 At 18 : 00 , TF 17 completed fueling and Fletcher detached Neosho with a destroyer , Sims , to take station further south at a prearranged rendezvous ( 16 ° S 158 ° E ) . TF 17 then turned to head northwest towards Rossel Island in the Louisiades . Unbeknownst to the two adversaries , their carriers were only 70 nmi ( 130 km ) away from each other by 20 : 00 that night . At 20 : 00 ( 13 ° 20 ′ S 157 ° 40 ′ E ) , Hara reversed course to meet Takagi who completed refueling and was now heading in Hara 's direction . 
 Late on 6 May or early on 7 May , Kamikawa Maru set up a seaplane base in the Deboyne Islands in order to help provide air support for the invasion forces as they approached Port Moresby . The rest of Marumo 's Cover Force then took station near the D 'Entrecasteaux Islands to help screen Abe 's oncoming convoy . 
 = = = Carrier battle , first day = = = 
 = = = = Morning strikes = = = = 
 At 06 : 25 on 7 May , TF 17 was 115 nmi ( 132 mi ; 213 km ) south of Rossel Island ( 13 ° 20 ′ S 154 ° 21 ′ E ) . At this time , Fletcher sent Crace 's cruiser and destroyer force , now designated Task Group 17 @.@ 3 ( TG 17 @.@ 3 ) , to block the Jomard Passage . Fletcher understood that Crace would be operating without air cover since TF 17 's carriers would be busy trying to locate and attack the Japanese carriers . The detachment of Crace 's warships reduced the anti @-@ aircraft defenses for Fletcher 's carriers . Nevertheless , Fletcher decided that the risk was necessary in order to ensure that the Japanese invasion forces could not slip through to Port Moresby while he was engaged with the Japanese carriers . 
 Believing Takagi 's carrier force was somewhere north of his location , in the vicinity of the Louisiades , Fletcher directed Yorktown to send 10 Douglas SBD Dauntless dive bombers as scouts to search that area beginning at 06 : 19 . In the meantime , Takagi , located approximately 300 nmi ( 350 mi ; 560 km ) east of Fletcher ( 13 ° 12 ′ S 158 ° 05 ′ E ) , launched 12 Nakajima B5Ns at 06 : 00 to scout for TF 17 . Hara believed that Fletcher 's ships were located to the south and advised Takagi to send the aircraft to search that area . Around the same time , Gotō 's cruisers Kinugasa and Furutaka launched four Kawanishi E7K2 Type 94 floatplanes to search southeast of the Louisiades . Augmenting their search were several floatplanes from Deboyne , four Kawanishi H6Ks from Tulagi , and three Mitsubishi G4M bombers from Rabaul . Each side readied the rest of its carrier attack aircraft to launch immediately once the enemy was located . 
 At 07 : 22 one of Takagi 's carrier scouts , from Shōkaku , reported that it located American ships bearing 182 ° , 163 nmi ( 188 mi ; 302 km ) from Takagi . At 07 : 45 , the scout confirmed that it had located " one carrier , one cruiser , and three destroyers " . Another Shōkaku scout aircraft quickly confirmed the sighting . The Shōkaku aircraft actually sighted and misidentified the Neosho and Sims . Believing that he had located the American carriers , Hara , with Takagi 's concurrence , immediately launched all of his available aircraft . A total of 78 aircraft — 18 Zero fighters , 36 Aichi D3A dive bombers , and 24 torpedo aircraft — began launching from Shōkaku and Zuikaku at 08 : 00 and were on their way by 08 : 15 towards the reported sighting . 
 At 08 : 20 , one of the Furutaka aircraft found Fletcher 's carriers and immediately reported it to Inoue 's headquarters at Rabaul , which passed the report on to Takagi . The sighting was confirmed by a Kinugasa floatplane at 08 : 30 . Takagi and Hara , confused by the conflicting sighting reports they were receiving , decided to continue with the strike on the ships to their south , but turned their carriers towards the northwest to close the distance with Furutaka 's reported contact . Takagi and Hara considered that the conflicting reports might mean that the U.S. carrier forces were operating in two separate groups . 
 At 08 : 15 , a Yorktown SBD piloted by John L. Nielsen sighted Gotō 's force screening the invasion convoy . Nielsen , making an error in his coded message , reported the sighting as " two carriers and four heavy cruisers " at 10 ° 3 ′ S 152 ° 27 ′ E , 225 nmi ( 259 mi ; 417 km ) northwest of TF17 . Fletcher concluded that the Japanese main carrier force was located and ordered the launch of all available carrier aircraft to attack . By 10 : 13 , the American strike of 93 aircraft – 18 Grumman F4F Wildcats , 53 Douglas SBD Dauntless dive bombers , and 22 Douglas TBD Devastator torpedo bombers – was on its way . At 10 : 19 , Nielsen landed and discovered his coding error . Although Gotō 's force included Shōhō , Nielsen thought that he saw two cruisers and four destroyers . At 10 : 12 , however , Fletcher received a report from a flight of three United States Army B @-@ 17s of an aircraft carrier , ten transports , and 16 warships 30 nmi ( 35 mi ; 56 km ) south of Nielsen 's sighting at 10 ° 35 ′ S 152 ° 36 ′ E. The B @-@ 17s actually saw the same thing as Nielsen : Shōhō , Gotō 's cruisers , plus the Port Moresby Invasion Force . Believing that the B @-@ 17 sighting was the main Japanese carrier force , Fletcher directed the airborne strike force towards this target . 
 At 09 : 15 , Takagi 's strike force reached its target area , sighted Neosho and Sims , and searched in vain for the American carriers . Finally , at 10 : 51 Shōkaku scout aircrews realized they were mistaken in their identification of the oiler and destroyer as aircraft carriers . Takagi now realized the American carriers were between him and the invasion convoy , placing the invasion forces in extreme danger . Takagi ordered his aircraft to immediately attack Neosho and Sims and then return to their carriers as quickly as possible . At 11 : 15 , the torpedo bombers and fighters abandoned the mission and headed back towards the carriers with their ordnance while the 36 dive bombers attacked the two American ships . 
 Four dive bombers attacked Sims and the rest dived on Neosho . The destroyer was hit by three bombs , broke in half , and sank immediately , killing all but 14 of her 192 @-@ man crew . Neosho was hit by seven bombs . One of the dive bombers , hit by anti @-@ aircraft fire , crashed into the oiler . Heavily damaged and without power , Neosho was left drifting and slowly sinking ( 16 ° 09 ′ S 158 ° 03 ′ E ) . Before losing power , Neosho was able to notify Fletcher by radio that she was under attack and in trouble , but garbled any further details as to just who or what was attacking her and gave wrong coordinates ( 16 ° 25 ′ S 157 ° 31 ′ E ) for its position . 
 The American strike aircraft sighted Shōhō a short distance northeast of Misima Island at 10 : 40 and deployed to attack . The Japanese carrier was protected by six Zeros and two Mitsubishi A5M fighters flying combat air patrol ( CAP ) , as the rest of the carrier 's aircraft were being prepared below decks for a strike against the American carriers . Gotō 's cruisers surrounded the carrier in a diamond formation , 3 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 yd ( 2 @,@ 700 – 4 @,@ 600 m ) off each of Shōhō 's corners . 
 Attacking first , Lexington 's air group , led by Commander William B. Ault , hit Shōhō with two 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 450 kg ) bombs and five torpedoes , causing severe damage . At 11 : 00 , Yorktown 's air group attacked the burning and now almost stationary carrier , scoring with up to 11 more 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 450 kg ) bombs and at least two torpedoes . Torn apart , Shōhō sank at 11 : 35 ( 10 ° 29 ′ S 152 ° 55 ′ E ) . Fearing more air attacks , Gotō withdrew his warships to the north , but sent the destroyer Sazanami back at 14 : 00 to rescue survivors . Only 203 of the carrier 's 834 @-@ man crew were recovered . Three American aircraft were lost in the attack : two SBDs from Lexington and one from Yorktown . All of Shōhō 's aircraft complement of 18 was lost , but three of the CAP fighter pilots were able to ditch at Deboyne and survived . At 12 : 10 , using a prearranged message to signal TF 17 on the success of the mission , Lexington SBD pilot and squadron commander Robert E. Dixon radioed " Scratch one flat top ! Signed Bob . " 
 = = = = Afternoon operations = = = = 
 The American aircraft returned and landed on their carriers by 13 : 38 . By 14 : 20 , the aircraft were rearmed and ready to launch against the Port Moresby Invasion Force or Gotō 's cruisers . Fletcher , however , was concerned that the whereabouts of the rest of the Japanese fleet carriers were still unknown . He was informed that Allied intelligence sources believed that up to four Japanese carriers might be supporting the MO operation . Fletcher concluded that by the time his scout aircraft located the remaining Japanese carriers it would be too late in the day to mount a strike . Thus , Fletcher decided to hold off on another strike this day and remain concealed under the thick overcast with fighters ready in defense . Fletcher turned TF17 southwest . 
 <unk> of the loss of Shōhō , Inoue ordered the invasion convoy to temporarily withdraw to the north and ordered Takagi , at this time located 225 nmi ( 259 mi ; 417 km ) east of TF 17 , to destroy the American carrier forces . As the invasion convoy reversed course , it was bombed by eight U.S. Army B @-@ 17s , but was not damaged . Gotō and Kajioka were told to assemble their ships south of Rossel Island for a night surface battle if the American ships came within range . 
 At 12 : 40 , a Deboyne @-@ based seaplane sighted and reported Crace 's force bearing 175 ° , 78 nmi ( 90 mi ; 144 km ) from Deboyne . At 13 : 15 , an aircraft from Rabaul sighted Crace 's force but submitted an erroneous report , stating the force contained two carriers and was located bearing 205 ° , 115 nmi ( 213 km ) from Deboyne . Based on these reports , Takagi , who was still awaiting the return of all of his aircraft from attacking Neosho , turned his carriers due west at 13 : 30 and advised Inoue at 15 : 00 that the U.S. carriers were at least 430 nmi ( 490 mi ; 800 km ) west of his location and that he would therefore be unable to attack them that day . 
 Inoue 's staff directed two groups of attack aircraft from Rabaul , already airborne since that morning , towards Crace 's reported position . The first group included 12 torpedo @-@ armed G4M bombers and the second group comprised 19 Mitsubishi G3M land attack aircraft armed with bombs . Both groups found and attacked Crace 's ships at 14 : 30 and claimed to have sunk a " California @-@ type " battleship and damaged another battleship and cruiser . In reality , Crace 's ships were undamaged and shot down four G4Ms . A short time later , three U.S. Army B @-@ 17s mistakenly bombed Crace , but caused no damage . 
 Crace at 15 : 26 radioed Fletcher he could not complete his mission without air support . Crace retired southward to a position about 220 nmi ( 250 mi ; 410 km ) southeast of Port Moresby to increase the range from Japanese carrier- or land @-@ based aircraft while remaining close enough to intercept any Japanese naval forces advancing beyond the Louisiades through either the Jomard Passage or the China Strait . Crace 's ships were low on fuel , and as Fletcher was maintaining radio silence ( and had not informed him in advance ) , Crace had no idea of Fletcher 's location , status , or intentions . 
 Shortly after 15 : 00 , Zuikaku monitored a message from a Deboyne @-@ based reconnaissance aircraft reporting ( incorrectly ) Crace 's force altered course to 120 ° true ( southeast ) . Takagi 's staff assumed the aircraft was shadowing Fletcher 's carriers and determined if the Allied ships held that course , they would be within striking range shortly before nightfall . Takagi and Hara determined to attack immediately with a select group of aircraft , minus fighter escort , even though it meant the strike would return after dark . 
 To try to confirm the location of the American carriers , at 15 : 15 Hara sent a flight of eight torpedo bombers as scouts to sweep 200 nmi ( 230 mi ; 370 km ) westward . About that same time , the dive bombers returned from their attack on Neosho and landed . Six of the weary dive bomber pilots were told they would be immediately departing on another mission . Choosing his most experienced crews , at 16 : 15 Hara launched 12 dive bombers and 15 torpedo planes with orders to fly bearing 277 ° to 280 nmi ( 320 mi ; 520 km ) . The eight scout aircraft reached the end of their 200 nmi ( 230 mi ; 370 km ) search leg and turned back without seeing Fletcher 's ships . 
 At 17 : 47 , TF 17 – operating under thick overcast 200 nmi ( 230 mi ; 370 km ) west of Takagi – detected the Japanese strike on radar heading in their direction , turned southeast into the wind , and vectored 11 CAP Wildcats , including one piloted by James H. Flatley , to intercept . Taking the Japanese formation by surprise , the Wildcats shot down seven torpedo bombers and one dive bomber , and heavily damaged another torpedo bomber ( which later crashed ) , at a cost of three Wildcats lost . 
 Having taken heavy losses in the attack , which also scattered their formations , the Japanese strike leaders canceled the mission after conferring by radio . The Japanese aircraft all jettisoned their ordnance and reversed course to return to their carriers . The sun set at 18 : 30 . Several of the Japanese dive bombers encountered the American carriers in the darkness , around 19 : 00 , and briefly confused as to their identity , circled in preparation for landing before anti @-@ aircraft fire from TF 17 's destroyers drove them away . By 20 : 00 , TF 17 and Takagi were about 100 nmi ( 120 mi ; 190 km ) apart . Takagi turned on his warships ' searchlights to help guide the 18 surviving aircraft back and all were recovered by 22 : 00 . 
 In the meantime , at 15 : 18 and 17 : 18 Neosho was able to radio TF 17 she was drifting northwest in a sinking condition . Neosho 's 17 : 18 report gave wrong coordinates , which hampered subsequent U.S. rescue efforts to locate the oiler . More significantly , the news informed Fletcher his only nearby available fuel supply was gone . 
 As nightfall ended aircraft operations for the day , Fletcher ordered TF 17 to head west and prepared to launch a 360 ° search at first light . Crace also turned west to stay within striking range of the Louisiades . Inoue directed Takagi to make sure he destroyed the U.S. carriers the next day , and postponed the Port Moresby landings to 12 May . Takagi elected to take his carriers 120 nmi ( 140 mi ; 220 km ) north during the night so he could concentrate his morning search to the west and south and ensure that his carriers could provide better protection for the invasion convoy . Gotō and Kajioka were unable to position and coordinate their ships in time to attempt a night attack on the Allied warships . 
 Both sides expected to find each other early the next day , and spent the night preparing their strike aircraft for the anticipated battle as their exhausted aircrews attempted to get a few hours sleep . In 1972 , U.S. Vice Admiral H. S. Duckworth , after reading Japanese records of the battle , commented , " Without a doubt , May 7 , 1942 , vicinity of Coral Sea , was the most confused battle area in world history . " Hara later told Yamamoto 's chief of staff , Admiral Matome Ugaki , he was so frustrated with the " poor luck " the Japanese experienced on 7 May that he felt like quitting the navy . 
 = = = Carrier battle , second day = = = 
 = = = = Attack on the Japanese carriers = = = = 
 At 06 : 15 on 8 May , from a position 100 nmi ( 120 mi ; 190 km ) east of Rossel Island ( 10 ° 25 ′ S 154 ° 5 ′ E ) , Hara launched seven torpedo bombers to search the area bearing 140 – 230 ° south and out to 250 nmi ( 290 mi ; 460 km ) from the Japanese carriers . Assisting in the search were three Kawanishi H6Ks from Tulagi and four G4M bombers from Rabaul . At 07 : 00 , the carrier striking force turned to the southwest and was joined by two of Gotō 's cruisers , Kinugasa and Furutaka , for additional screening support . The invasion convoy , Gotō , and Kajioka steered towards a rendezvous point 40 nmi ( 46 mi ; 74 km ) east of Woodlark Island to await the outcome of the carrier battle . During the night , the warm frontal zone with low @-@ hanging clouds which had helped hide the American carriers on 7 May moved north and east and now covered the Japanese carriers , limiting visibility to between 2 and 15 nmi ( 2 @.@ 3 and 17 @.@ 3 mi ; 3 @.@ 7 and 27 @.@ 8 km ) . 
 At 06 : 35 , TF 17 – operating under Fitch 's tactical control and positioned 180 nmi ( 210 mi ; 330 km ) southeast of the <unk> , launched 18 SBDs to conduct a 360 ° search out to 200 nmi ( 230 mi ; 370 km ) . The skies over the American carriers were mostly clear , with 17 nmi ( 20 mi ; 31 km ) visibility . 
 At 08 : 20 , a Lexington SBD piloted by Joseph G. Smith spotted the Japanese carriers through a hole in the clouds and notified TF 17 . Two minutes later , a Shōkaku search plane commanded by Kenzō Kanno sighted TF 17 and notified Hara . The two forces were about 210 nmi ( 240 mi ; 390 km ) away from each other . Both sides raced to launch their strike aircraft . 
 At 09 : 15 , the Japanese carriers launched a combined strike of 18 fighters , 33 dive bombers , and 18 torpedo planes , commanded by Lieutenant Commander Kakuichi Takahashi . The American carriers each launched a separate strike . Yorktown 's group consisted of six fighters , 24 dive bombers , and nine torpedo planes and was on its way by 09 : 15 . Lexington 's group of nine fighters , 15 dive bombers , and 12 torpedo planes was off at 09 : 25 . Both the American and Japanese carrier warship forces turned to head directly for each other 's location at high speed in order to shorten the distance their aircraft would have to fly on their return legs . 
 Yorktown 's dive bombers , led by William O. Burch , reached the Japanese carriers at 10 : 32 , and paused to allow the slower torpedo squadron to arrive so that they could conduct a simultaneous attack . At this time , Shōkaku and Zuikaku were about 10 @,@ 000 yd ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) apart , with Zuikaku hidden under a rain squall of low @-@ hanging clouds . The two carriers were protected by 16 CAP Zero fighters . The Yorktown dive bombers commenced their attacks at 10 : 57 on Shōkaku and hit the radically maneuvering carrier with two 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 450 kg ) bombs , tearing open the forecastle and causing heavy damage to the carrier 's flight and hangar decks . The Yorktown torpedo planes missed with all of their ordnance . Two U.S. dive bombers and two CAP Zeros were shot down during the attack . 
 Lexington 's aircraft arrived and attacked at 11 : 30 . Two dive bombers attacked Shōkaku , hitting the carrier with one 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 450 kg ) bomb , causing further damage . Two other dive bombers dove on Zuikaku , missing with their bombs . The rest of Lexington 's dive bombers were unable to find the Japanese carriers in the heavy clouds . Lexington 's TBDs missed Shōkaku with all 11 of their torpedoes . The 13 CAP Zeros on patrol at this time shot down three Wildcats . 
 With her flight deck heavily damaged and 223 of her crew killed or wounded , Shōkaku was unable to conduct further aircraft operations . Her captain , Takatsugu <unk> , requested permission from Takagi and Hara to withdraw from the battle , to which Takagi agreed . At 12 : 10 , Shōkaku , accompanied by two destroyers , retired to the northeast . 
 = = = = Attack on the U.S. carriers = = = = 
 At 10 : 55 , Lexington 's CXAM @-@ 1 radar detected the inbound Japanese aircraft at a range of 68 nmi ( 78 mi ; 126 km ) and vectored nine Wildcats to intercept . Expecting the Japanese torpedo bombers to be at a much lower altitude than they actually were , six of the Wildcats were stationed too low , and thus missed the Japanese aircraft as they passed by overhead . Because of the heavy losses in aircraft suffered the night before , the Japanese could not execute a full torpedo attack on both carriers . Lieutenant Commander <unk> Shimazaki , commanding the Japanese torpedo planes , sent 14 to attack Lexington and four to attack Yorktown . A Wildcat shot down one and 8 patrolling Yorktown SBDs destroyed three more as the Japanese torpedo planes descended to take attack position . Four SBDs were shot down by Zeros escorting the torpedo planes . 
 The Japanese attack began at 11 : 13 as the carriers , stationed 3 @,@ 000 yd ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) apart , and their escorts opened fire with anti @-@ aircraft guns . The four torpedo planes which attacked Yorktown all missed . The remaining torpedo planes successfully employed a pincer attack on Lexington , which had a much larger turning radius than Yorktown , and , at 11 : 20 , hit her with two Type 91 torpedoes . The first torpedo buckled the port aviation gasoline stowage tanks . Undetected , gasoline vapors spread into surrounding compartments . The second torpedo ruptured the port water main , reducing water pressure to the three forward <unk> and forcing the associated boilers to be shut down . The ship , however , could still make 24 kn ( 28 mph ; 44 km / h ) with her remaining boilers . Four of the Japanese torpedo planes were shot down by anti @-@ aircraft fire . 
 The 33 Japanese dive bombers circled to attack from upwind , and thus did not begin their dives from 14 @,@ 000 ft ( 4 @,@ 300 m ) until three to four minutes after the torpedo planes began their attacks . The 19 Shōkaku dive bombers , under Takahashi , lined up on Lexington while the remaining 14 , directed by <unk> Ema , targeted Yorktown . Escorting Zeros shielded Takahashi 's aircraft from four Lexington CAP Wildcats which attempted to intervene , but two Wildcats circling above Yorktown were able to disrupt Ema 's formation . Takahashi 's bombers damaged Lexington with two bomb hits and several near misses , causing fires which were contained by 12 : 33 . At 11 : 27 , Yorktown was hit in the center of her flight deck by a single 250 kg ( 550 lb ) , semi @-@ armor @-@ piercing bomb which penetrated four decks before exploding , causing severe structural damage to an aviation storage room and killing or seriously wounding 66 men . Up to 12 near misses damaged Yorktown 's hull below the waterline . Two of the dive bombers were shot down by a CAP Wildcat during the attack . 
 As the Japanese aircraft completed their attacks and began to withdraw , believing that they inflicted fatal damage to both carriers , they ran a gauntlet of CAP Wildcats and SBDs . In the ensuing aerial duels , three SBDs and three Wildcats for the U.S. , and three torpedo bombers , one dive bomber , and one Zero for the Japanese were downed . By 12 : 00 , the U.S. and Japanese strike groups were on their way back to their respective carriers . During their return , aircraft from the two adversaries passed each other in the air , resulting in more air @-@ to @-@ air altercations . Kanno 's and Takahashi 's aircraft were shot down , killing both of them . 
 = = = = Recovery , reassessment , and retreat = = = = 
 The strike forces , with many damaged aircraft , reached and landed on their respective carriers between 12 : 50 and 14 : 30 . In spite of damage , Yorktown and Lexington were both able to recover aircraft from their returning air groups . During recovery operations , for various reasons the U.S. lost an additional five SBDs , two TBDs , and a Wildcat , and the Japanese lost two Zeros , five dive bombers , and one torpedo plane . Forty @-@ six of the original 69 aircraft from the Japanese strike force returned from the mission and landed on Zuikaku . Of these , three more Zeros , four dive bombers , and five torpedo planes were judged damaged beyond repair and were immediately jettisoned into the ocean . 
 As TF 17 recovered its aircraft , Fletcher assessed the situation . The returning aviators reported they heavily damaged one carrier , but that another had escaped damage . Fletcher noted that both his carriers were hurt and that his air groups had suffered high fighter losses . Fuel was also a concern due to the loss of Neosho . At 14 : 22 , Fitch notified Fletcher that he had reports of two undamaged Japanese carriers and that this was supported by radio intercepts . Believing that he faced overwhelming Japanese carrier superiority , Fletcher elected to withdraw TF17 from the battle . Fletcher radioed MacArthur the approximate position of the Japanese carriers and suggested that he attack with his land @-@ based bombers . 
 Around 14 : 30 , Hara informed Takagi that only 24 Zeros , eight dive bombers , and four torpedo planes from the carriers were currently operational . Takagi was worried about his ships ' fuel levels ; his cruisers were at 50 % and some of his destroyers were as low as 20 % . At 15 : 00 , Takagi notified Inoue his fliers had sunk two American carriers – Yorktown and a " Saratoga @-@ class " – but heavy losses in aircraft meant he could not continue to provide air cover for the invasion . Inoue , whose reconnaissance aircraft sighted Crace 's ships earlier that day , recalled the invasion convoy to Rabaul , postponed MO to 3 July , and ordered his forces to assemble northeast of the Solomons to begin the RY operation . Zuikaku and her escorts turned towards Rabaul while Shōkaku headed for Japan . 
 Aboard Lexington , damage control parties put out the fires and restored her to operational condition , however at 12 : 47 , sparks from unattended electric motors ignited gasoline fumes near the ship 's central control station . The resulting explosion killed 25 men and started a large fire . Around 14 : 42 , another large explosion occurred , starting a second severe fire . A third explosion occurred at 15 : 25 and at 15 : 38 the ship 's crew reported the fires as uncontrollable . Lexington 's crew began abandoning ship at 17 : 07 . After the carrier 's survivors were rescued , including Fitch and the carrier 's captain , Frederick C. Sherman , at 19 : 15 the destroyer Phelps fired five torpedoes into the burning ship , which sank in 2 @,@ 400 fathoms at 19 : 52 ( 15 ° 15 ′ S 155 ° 35 ′ E ) . Two hundred and sixteen of the carrier 's 2 @,@ 951 @-@ man crew went down with the ship , along with 36 aircraft . Phelps and the other assisting warships left immediately to rejoin Yorktown and her escorts , which departed at 16 : 01 , and TF17 retired to the southwest . Later that evening , MacArthur informed Fletcher that eight of his B @-@ 17s had attacked the invasion convoy and that it was retiring to the northwest . 
 That evening , Crace detached Hobart , which was critically low on fuel , and the destroyer Walke , which was having engine trouble , to proceed to Townsville . Crace overheard radio reports saying the enemy invasion convoy had turned back , but , unaware Fletcher had withdrawn , he remained on patrol with the rest of <unk> in the Coral Sea in case the Japanese invasion force resumed its advance towards Port Moresby . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On 9 May , TF 17 altered course to the east and proceeded out of the Coral Sea via a route south of New Caledonia . Nimitz ordered Fletcher to return Yorktown to Pearl Harbor as soon as possible after refueling at Tongatabu . During the day , U.S. Army bombers attacked Deboyne and Kamikawa Maru , inflicting unknown damage . In the meantime , having heard nothing from Fletcher , Crace deduced that TF17 had departed the area . At 01 : 00 on 10 May , hearing no further reports of Japanese ships advancing towards Port Moresby , Crace turned towards Australia and arrived at Cid Harbor , 130 nmi ( 150 mi ; 240 km ) south of Townsville , on 11 May . 
 At 22 : 00 on 8 May , Yamamoto ordered Inoue to turn his forces around , destroy the remaining Allied warships , and complete the invasion of Port Moresby . Inoue did not cancel the recall of the invasion convoy , but ordered Takagi and Gotō to pursue the remaining Allied warship forces in the Coral Sea . Critically low on fuel , Takagi 's warships spent most of 9 May refueling from the fleet oiler <unk> Maru . Late in the evening of 9 May , Takagi and Gotō headed southeast , then southwest into the Coral Sea . Seaplanes from Deboyne assisted Takagi in searching for TF 17 on the morning of 10 May . Fletcher and Crace , however , were already well on their way out of the area . At 13 : 00 on 10 May , Takagi concluded that the enemy was gone and decided to turn back towards Rabaul . Yamamoto concurred with Takagi 's decision and ordered Zuikaku to return to Japan to replenish her air groups . At the same time , Kamikawa Maru packed up and departed Deboyne . At noon on 11 May , a U.S. Navy PBY on patrol from Nouméa sighted the drifting Neosho ( 15 ° 35 ′ S 155 ° 36 ′ E ) . The U.S. destroyer Henley responded and rescued 109 Neosho and 14 Sims survivors later that day , then scuttled the tanker with torpedoes . 
 On 10 May , the RY operation commenced . After the operation 's flagship , minelayer Okinoshima , was sunk by the American submarine S @-@ 42 on 12 May ( 05 ° 06 ′ S 153 ° 48 ′ E ) , the landings were postponed to 17 May . In the meantime , Halsey 's TF 16 reached the South Pacific near Efate and , on 13 May , headed north to contest the Japanese approach to Nauru and Ocean Island . On 14 May , Nimitz , having obtained intelligence concerning the Combined Fleet 's upcoming operation against Midway , ordered Halsey to make sure that Japanese scout aircraft sighted his ships the next day , after which he was to return to Pearl Harbor immediately . At 10 : 15 on 15 May , a Kawanishi reconnaissance aircraft from Tulagi sighted TF 16 445 nmi ( 512 mi ; 824 km ) east of the Solomons . Halsey 's feint worked . Fearing a carrier air attack on his exposed invasion forces , Inoue immediately canceled RY and ordered his ships back to Rabaul and Truk . On 19 May , TF 16 – which returned to the Efate area to refuel – turned towards Pearl Harbor and arrived there on 26 May . Yorktown reached Pearl the following day . 
 Shōkaku reached Kure , Japan , on 17 May , almost capsizing en route during a storm due to her battle damage . Zuikaku arrived at Kure on 21 May , having made a brief stop at Truk on 15 May . Acting on signals intelligence , the U.S. placed eight submarines along the projected route of the carriers ' return paths to Japan , but the submarines were not able to make any attacks . Japan 's Naval General Staff estimated that it would take two to three months to repair Shōkaku and replenish the carriers ' air groups . Thus , both carriers would be unable to participate in Yamamoto 's upcoming Midway operation . The two carriers rejoined the Combined Fleet on 14 July and were key participants in subsequent carrier battles against U.S. forces . The five I @-@ class submarines supporting the MO operation were <unk> to support an attack on Sydney Harbour three weeks later as part of a campaign to disrupt Allied supply lines . En route to Truk , however , I @-@ 28 was torpedoed on 17 May by the U.S. submarine <unk> and sunk with all hands . 
 = = Significance = = 
 = = = A new type of naval warfare = = = 
 The battle was the first naval engagement in history in which the participating ships never sighted or fired directly at each other . Instead , manned aircraft acted as the offensive artillery for the ships involved . Thus , the respective commanders were participating in a new type of warfare , carrier @-@ versus @-@ carrier , with which neither had any experience . In H. P. <unk> 's words , the commanders " had to contend with uncertain and poor communications in situations in which the area of battle had grown far beyond that prescribed by past experience but in which speeds had increased to an even greater extent , thereby compressing decision @-@ making time . " Because of the greater speed with which decisions were required , the Japanese were at a disadvantage as Inoue was too far away at Rabaul to effectively direct his naval forces in real time , in contrast to Fletcher who was on @-@ scene with his carriers . The Japanese admirals involved were often slow to communicate important information to each other . 
 The experienced Japanese carrier aircrews performed better than those of the U.S. , achieving greater results with an equivalent number of aircraft . The Japanese attack on the American carriers on 8 May was better coordinated than the U.S. attack on the Japanese carriers . The Japanese suffered much higher losses to their carrier aircrews , however , losing ninety aircrew killed in the battle compared with thirty @-@ five for the Americans . Japan 's cadre of highly skilled carrier aircrews with which it began the war were , in effect , irreplaceable because of an institutionalized limitation in its training programs and the absence of a pool of experienced reserves or advanced training programs for new airmen . Coral Sea started a trend which resulted in the irreparable attrition of Japan 's veteran carrier aircrews by the end of October 1942 . 
 While the Americans did not perform as expected , they did learn from their mistakes in the battle and made improvements to their carrier tactics and equipment , including fighter tactics , strike coordination , torpedo bombers , and defensive strategies , such as anti @-@ aircraft artillery , which contributed to better results in later battles . Radar gave the Americans a limited advantage in this battle , but its value to the U.S. Navy increased over time as the technology improved and the Allies learned how to employ it more effectively . Following the loss of Lexington , improved methods for containing aviation fuel and better damage control procedures were implemented by the Americans . Coordination between the Allied land @-@ based air forces and the U.S. Navy was poor during this battle , but this too would improve over time . 
 Japanese and U.S. carriers faced off against each other again in the battles of Midway , the Eastern Solomons , and the Santa Cruz Islands in 1942 , and the Philippine Sea in 1944 . Each of these battles was strategically significant , to varying degrees , in deciding the course and ultimate outcome of the Pacific War . 
 = = = Tactical and strategic implications = = = 
 Both sides publicly claimed victory after the battle . In terms of ships lost , the Japanese won a tactical victory by sinking an American fleet carrier , an oiler , and a destroyer – 41 @,@ 826 long tons ( 42 @,@ 497 t ) – versus a light carrier , a destroyer , and several smaller warships – 19 @,@ 000 long tons ( 19 @,@ 000 t ) – sunk by the Americans . Lexington represented , at that time , 25 % of U.S. carrier strength in the Pacific . The Japanese public was informed of the victory with overstatement of the American damage and understatement of their own . 
 In strategic terms , however , the Allies won because the seaborne invasion of Port Moresby was averted , lessening the threat to the supply lines between the U.S. and Australia . Although the withdrawal of Yorktown from the Coral Sea conceded the field , the Japanese were forced to abandon the operation that had initiated the Battle of Coral Sea in the first place . 
 The battle marked the first time that a Japanese invasion force was turned back without achieving its objective , which greatly lifted the morale of the Allies after a series of defeats by the Japanese during the initial six months of the Pacific Theater . Port Moresby was vital to Allied strategy and its garrison could well have been overwhelmed by the experienced Japanese invasion troops . The US Navy , however , also exaggerated the damage it inflicted , which was to cause the press to treat its reports of Midway with more caution . 
 The results of the battle had a substantial effect on the strategic planning of both sides . Without a hold in New Guinea , the subsequent Allied advance , arduous though it was , would have been more difficult . For the Japanese , who focused on the tactical results , the battle was seen as merely a temporary setback . The results of the battle confirmed the low opinion held by the Japanese of American fighting capability and supported their overconfident belief that future carrier operations against the U.S. were assured of success . 
 = = = Midway = = = 
 One of the most significant effects of the Coral Sea battle was the loss of Shōkaku and Zuikaku to Yamamoto for his planned showdown with the American carriers at Midway ( Shōhō was to have been employed at Midway in a tactical role supporting the Japanese invasion ground forces ) . The Japanese believed that they sank two carriers in the Coral Sea , but this still left at least two more U.S. Navy carriers , Enterprise and Hornet , which could help defend Midway . The aircraft complement of the American carriers was larger than that of their Japanese counterparts , which , when combined with the land @-@ based aircraft at Midway , meant that the Combined Fleet no longer enjoyed a significant numerical aircraft superiority over the Americans for the impending battle . In fact , the Americans would have three carriers to oppose Yamamoto at Midway , because Yorktown remained operational despite the damage from Coral Sea , and the U.S. Navy was able to patch her up sufficiently at Pearl Harbor between 27 and 30 May to allow participation in the battle . At Midway , Yorktown 's aircraft played crucial roles in sinking two Japanese fleet carriers . Yorktown also absorbed both Japanese aerial counterattacks at Midway which otherwise would have been directed at the two remaining American carriers . 
 In contrast to the strenuous efforts by the Americans to employ the maximum forces available for Midway , the Japanese apparently did not even consider trying to include Zuikaku in the operation . No effort appears to have been made to combine the surviving Shōkaku aircrews with Zuikaku 's air groups or to quickly provide Zuikaku with replacement aircraft so she could participate with the rest of the Combined Fleet at Midway . Shōkaku herself was unable to conduct further aircraft operations , with her flight deck heavily damaged , and she required almost three months of repair in Japan . 
 Historians H. P. Willmott , Jonathan Parshall , and Anthony Tully believe Yamamoto made a significant strategic error in his decision to support the MO with strategic assets . Since Yamamoto had decided the decisive battle with the Americans was to take place at Midway , he should not have diverted any of his important assets , especially fleet carriers , to a secondary operation like MO . Yamamoto 's decision meant Japanese naval forces were weakened just enough at both the Coral Sea and Midway battles to allow the Allies to defeat them in detail . Willmott adds , if either operation was important enough to commit fleet carriers , then all of the Japanese carriers should have been committed to each in order to ensure success . By committing crucial assets to MO , Yamamoto made the more important Midway operation dependent on the secondary operation 's success . 
 Moreover , Yamamoto apparently missed the other implications of the Coral Sea battle : the unexpected appearance of American carriers in exactly the right place and time to effectively contest the Japanese , and U.S. Navy carrier aircrews demonstrating sufficient skill and determination to do significant damage to the Japanese carrier forces . These would be repeated at Midway , and as a result , Japan lost four fleet carriers , the core of her naval offensive forces , and thereby lost the strategic initiative in the Pacific War . Parshall and Tully point out that , due to American industrial strength , once Japan lost its numerical superiority in carrier forces as a result of Midway , Japan could never regain it . Parshall and Tully add , " The Battle of the Coral Sea had provided the first hints that the Japanese high @-@ water mark had been reached , but it was the Battle of Midway that put up the sign for all to see . " 
 = = = Situation in the South Pacific = = = 
 The Australians and U.S. forces in Australia were initially disappointed with the outcome of the Battle of the Coral Sea , fearing the MO operation was the precursor to an invasion of the Australian mainland and the setback to Japan was only temporary . In a meeting held in late May , the Australian Advisory War Council described the battle 's result as " rather disappointing " given that the Allies had advance notice of Japanese intentions . General MacArthur provided Australian Prime Minister John Curtin with his assessment of the battle , stating that " all the elements that have produced disaster in the Western Pacific since the beginning of the war " were still present as Japanese forces could strike anywhere if supported by major elements of the IJN . 
 Because of the severe losses in carriers at Midway , however , the Japanese were unable to support another attempt to invade Port Moresby from the sea , forcing Japan to try to take Port Moresby by land . Japan began its land offensive towards Port Moresby along the Kokoda Track on 21 July from Buna and Gona . By then , the Allies had reinforced New Guinea with additional troops ( primarily Australian ) starting with the Australian 14th Brigade which embarked at Townsville on 15 May . The added forces slowed , then eventually halted the Japanese advance towards Port Moresby in September 1942 , and defeated an attempt by the Japanese to overpower an Allied base at Milne Bay . 
 In the meantime , the Allies learned in July that the Japanese had begun building an airfield on Guadalcanal . Operating from this base the Japanese would threaten the shipping supply routes to Australia . To prevent this from occurring , the Americans chose Tulagi and nearby Guadalcanal as the target of their first offensive . The failure of the Japanese to take Port Moresby , and their defeat at Midway , had the effect of dangling their base at Tulagi and Guadalcanal without effective protection from other Japanese bases . Tulagi and Guadalcanal was four hours flying time from Rabaul , the nearest large Japanese base . 
 On 7 August 1942 , 11 @,@ 000 U.S. Marines landed on Guadalcanal and 3 @,@ 000 U.S. Marines landed on Tulagi and nearby islands . The Japanese troops on Tulagi and nearby islands were outnumbered and killed almost to the last man in the Battle of Tulagi and Gavutu – Tanambogo while the U.S. Marines on Guadalcanal captured an airfield under construction by the Japanese . Thus began the Guadalcanal and Solomon Islands campaigns that resulted in a series of attritional , combined @-@ arms battles between Allied and Japanese forces over the next year which , in tandem with the New Guinea campaign , eventually neutralized Japanese defenses in the South Pacific , inflicted irreparable losses on the Japanese military — especially its navy — and contributed significantly to the Allies ' eventual victory over Japan . 
 The delay in the advance of Japanese forces also allowed the United States Marine Corps to land on Funafuti on 2 October 1942 , with a Naval Construction Battalion ( Seabees ) building airfields on three of the atolls of Tuvalu from which units of the USAAF B @-@ 24 Liberator bombers of the Seventh Air Force operated . The atolls of Tuvalu acted as a staging post during the preparation for the Battle of Tarawa and the Battle of Makin that commenced on 20 November 1943 , which was the implementation of operation Galvanic . 
 = = Movies = = 
 Battle of the Coral Sea ( 1959 ) 
 = = Documentaries = = 
 Crusade in The Pacific , Episode 5 : The Navy Holds : 1942 ( 13m : 30s @-@ 19 : 37 ) , a segment of an episode from a TV documentary series aired originally in 1951 and made from the theatrical releases of Movietone News in 1942 . Currently , the series can be purchased in DVD format ( as individual episodes or as a collection ) . Information on <unk> Online video 
 War in the Pacific , Part I : The Pacific in Eruption , an episode from another documentary but made from the same Movietone News newsreels of 1942 . Also available in DVD format . Online video 
 Battle of the Coral Sea – Lest We Forget , online documentary released in 2010 . Online video 
 = = = Print = = = 
 = = = Online = = = 
 = Ambohimanga = 
 Ambohimanga is a hill and traditional fortified royal settlement ( rova ) in Madagascar , located approximately 24 kilometers ( 15 mi ) northeast of the capital city of Antananarivo . The hill and the rova that stands on top are considered the most significant symbol of the cultural identity of the Merina people and the most important and best @-@ preserved monument of the precolonial Kingdom of Madagascar and its precursor , the Kingdom of Imerina . The walled historic village includes residences and burial sites of several key monarchs . The site , one of the twelve sacred hills of Imerina , is associated with strong feelings of national identity and has maintained its spiritual and sacred character both in ritual practice and the popular imagination for at least four hundred years . It remains a place of worship to which pilgrims come from Madagascar and elsewhere . 
 The site has been politically important since the early 18th century , when King Andriamasinavalona ( 1675 – 1710 ) divided the Kingdom of Imerina into four quadrants and assigned his son Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana to govern the northeastern quadrant , Avaradrano , from its newly designated capital at Ambohimanga . The division of Imerina led to 77 years of civil war , during which time the successive rulers of Avaradrano led military campaigns to expand their territory while undertaking modifications to the defenses at Ambohimanga to better protect it against attacks . The war was ended from Ambohimanga by King Andrianampoinimerina , who successfully undertook negotiations and military campaigns that reunited Imerina under his rule by 1793 . Upon capturing the historic capital of Imerina at Antananarivo , Andrianampoinimerina shifted his royal court and all political functions back to its original locus at that city 's royal compound and declared the two cities of equal importance , with Ambohimanga as the kingdom 's spiritual capital . He and later rulers in his line continued to conduct royal rituals at the site and regularly inhabited and remodeled Ambohimanga until French colonization of the kingdom and the exile of the royal family in 1897 . The significance of historical events here and the presence of royal tombs have given the hill a sacred character that is further enhanced at Ambohimanga by the burial sites of several Vazimba , the island 's earliest inhabitants . 
 The royal compound on the hilltop is surrounded by a complex system of defensive ditches and stone walls and is accessed by 14 gateways , of which many were sealed by stone disc barriers . The gateways and construction of buildings within the compound are arranged according to two overlaid cosmological systems that value the four cardinal points radiating from a unifying center , and attach sacred importance to the northeastern direction . The complex inside the wall is subdivided into three smaller rova . Mahandrihono , the largest compound , was established between 1710 and 1730 by King Andriambelomasina ; it remains largely intact and contains the royal tombs , house of King Andrianampoinimerina , summer palace of Queen Ranavalona II , and sites that figured in key royal rituals such as the sacrificial zebu pen , royal bath and main courtyard . Original buildings no longer remain in the compound of Bevato , established before 1710 by Andriamborona , and the Nanjakana compound , built for King Andrianjafy in the late 19th century . The hill and its royal fortified city were added to the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites in 2001 and represent Madagascar 's only cultural site following the destruction by fire in 1995 of its historic sister city , the Rova of Antananarivo , shortly before the latter 's intended inscription to the list . Numerous governmental and civil society organizations support the conservation of Ambohimanga by restoring damaged features and preventing further degradation . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name Ambohimanga is a noun @-@ adjective compound in the standard Malagasy language composed of two parts : <unk> , meaning " hill " , and manga , which can mean " sacred " , " blue " , " beautiful " or " good " . The earliest known name for the hill was <unk> . It was renamed <unk> ( " hill of the guinea fowls " ) around 1700 by a dethroned prince named Andriamborona who , according to oral history , was the first to settle on the hilltop with his family . The hill received its current name from King Andriamasinavalona in the early 18th century . 
 = = History = = 
 Madagascar 's central highlands , including the area around Ambohimanga , were first inhabited between 200 BCE – 300 CE by the island 's earliest settlers , the Vazimba , who appear to have arrived by pirogue from southeastern Borneo to establish simple villages in the island 's dense forests . By the 15th century the Merina ethnic group from the southeastern coast had gradually migrated into the central highlands where they established hilltop villages interspersed among the existing Vazimba settlements , which were ruled by local kings . The tombs of at least four Vazimba are located on or around Ambohimanga hill and are sites of pilgrimage , including the tombs of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . In the mid @-@ 16th century the disparate Merina principalities were united as the Kingdom of Imerina under the rule of King Andriamanelo ( 1540 – 1575 ) , who initiated military campaigns to expel or assimilate the Vazimba population . Conflict with the Vazimba led Andriamanelo to fortify his hill town using earthen walls , stone gateways and deep defensive trenches . This fortified town model , called a rova , was propagated by the noble class throughout Imerina until French colonization of Madagascar in 1895 . 
 The earliest settlement at the height of Ambohimanga was most likely established in the 15th century , coinciding with the arrival of the Merina in the highlands . Rice paddies took the place of the original valley forests by the 16th century , and the growing population near the valleys around Ambohimanga became known by the clan name <unk> ( " people of the cultivated land " ) . According to oral history , however , the first to settle the site of the Ambohimanga rova was Andriamborona , the dethroned prince of the highland territory of Imamo , who relocated to the then @-@ unpopulated hilltop in around 1700 accompanied by his nephew , his wife , and his mother , <unk> . Merina king Andriamasinavalona ( 1675 – 1710 ) , who reigned over Imerina from his royal compound in Antananarivo , noticed a bonfire lit by the family on the southern face of the hill 24 kilometers away . The visibility of the site from his capital led Andriamasinavalona to desire Ambohimanga as a residence for his son , Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana . Andriamborona and his family agreed to shift three times to different parts of the hill , including the future site of the royal compound of Bevato , in response to consecutive requests from the king . For a short time he and the prince lived in neighboring houses at Bevato before Andriamborona and his family finally left the hill for the distant highland village of Ambatolampy , where he lived the rest of his life ; the king retrieved their bodies for burial at Ambohimanga . 
 In 1710 , Andriamasinavalona divided the Kingdom of Imerina into four quadrants , which were given to his four favorite sons to rule . Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana received the eastern quadrant , Avaradrano , and transformed his rova at Ambohimanga into its capital . As the first king of Avaradrano ( 1710 – 1730 ) , Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana also built the site 's defensive walls and its first set of seven gates . Rather than rule their respective territories peacefully as Andriamasinavalona had intended , his four sons began a series of wars to seize control of neighboring territory , causing famine and suffering among the peasant population of Imerina . Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana spent much of his reign strengthening the authority of his governance at Ambohimanga and attracting residents to settle in the surrounding villages while battling his brothers to increase the land under his control . He was succeeded by his adopted son , Andriambelomasina ( 1730 – 1770 ) , who continued to rule Avaradrano from Ambohimanga in the Mahandrihono compound he built beside the original compound of Besakana . Andriambelomasina significantly expanded Ambohimanga and strengthened its defenses , enabling him to successfully repel an attack against the rova by a band of Sakalava warriors employed by his chief rival , the ruler of Antananarivo . He named as his successor his eldest son , Andrianjafy ( 1770 – 1787 ) , and designated his grandson Andrianampoinimerina to follow Andrianjafy in the order of succession . Andrianjafy , a weak and unjust ruler , maintained his capital at Ambohimanga where he built a new private compound called Nanjakana , but often resided in the nearby village of Ilafy . 
 Andrianampoinimerina dethroned Andrianjafy in a violent conflict that ended in 1787 . The king then used Ambohimanga as a launching point for a successful campaign to bring the twelve sacred hills of Imerina under his rule , including the hill city of Antananarivo , thereby reuniting the four quadrants of the divided Kingdom of Imerina under his sovereignty and putting an end to 77 years of civil war . To consolidate support for his rule , Andrianampoinimerina mobilized representatives of the numerous noble castes to participate in the most extensive effort yet to expand and fortify Ambohimanga . He ordered the construction of new city walls , gates and defensive trenches , as well as a rosewood palace called Mahandrihono , which he had built in the traditional style . 
 Following the conquest of Antananarivo in 1793 , Andrianampoinimerina shifted the political capital of Imerina from Ambohimanga to its original site at Antananarivo , while pronouncing Ambohimanga the kingdom 's spiritual capital . Important traditional rituals continued to be held at Ambohimanga , and Andrianampoinimerina regularly stayed in its Mahandrihono palace . His son , Radama I , inhabited Ambohimanga 's Nanjakana compound as a youth before relocating to Antananarivo , and visited Ambohimanga frequently after the move . Radama 's widow and successor , Ranavalona I , renovated the Mahandrihono compound and moved several buildings from the sister rova at Antananarivo to Ambohimanga . She also forbade swine at Ambohimanga due to their association with Europeans , who had propagated pork as a food source in the decade prior . Subsequent queens made their own mark on the site , including the reconstruction of Nanjakana by Rasoherina , and Ranavalona II 's addition of two large pavilions to the Mahandrihono compound that reflected a syncretism of traditional and Western architectural styles . 
 Throughout much of the 19th century and particularly under the reign of Queen Ranavalona I ( 1828 – 1861 ) , Ambohimanga was forbidden to visiting foreigners , contributing to its mystique as a " forbidden city " . This status remained until 1897 when the French colonial administration transferred all the relics and significant belongings of the royal family from Ambohimanga to Antananarivo to break the spirit of resistance and ethnic identity that these symbols inspired in the Malagasy people , particularly in the highlands . In the early 20th century , the area was further changed when the French removed the sacred forests remaining on the neighboring hilltops in the early 20th century . The city nonetheless retains its symbolic significance in Imerina to this day . 
 = = Layout = = 
 Ambohimanga is located in the central highlands of Madagascar , approximately 24 kilometers ( 15 mi ) northeast of the capital city of Antananarivo . The hill rises steeply approximately 450 feet from the surrounding terrain on its eastern side and gradually slopes downward toward the west . The royal city of the same name , situated at the peak of the hill , has panoramic views of the surrounding hills and valleys , and is surrounded on the hill 's slopes and the valley floor by the houses of residents of Ambohimanga village . The terraced rice paddies that cover the hillsides to the north and south of the royal city were created in the 17th and 18th centuries to provide a staple food source to the inhabitants of the hill and its surrounding villages . The crest of Ambohimanga is higher than the surrounding hills and others among the traditionally designated twelve sacred hills of Imerina , symbolically indicative of the site 's political significance relative to other similar hill towns . This elevation also offered an excellent vantage point for surveying the surrounding areas for advancing enemy troops . Rising from among the surrounding valleys and terraced rice paddies , the hill is topped with a forest that was exempted from the widespread deforestation of the highlands due to its sacred nature . The UNESCO World Heritage Site encompassing the hill and the royal city at its peak extends over a surface area of 59 hectares , with a buffer zone of 425 hectares . 
 = = = Symbolism = = = 
 The layout of Ambohimanga 's three compounds and the structures within them followed a traditional design established by the earliest Merina highland settlers by the 15th century . According to custom , a rova could only be established by an andriana ( noble ) . Its foundation was built to raise the rova higher than the surrounding buildings outside its walls . Contained within the rova was at least one lapa ( royal palace or residence ) as well as the <unk> ( tomb ) of one or more of the site 's founders and family members . It also enclosed a kianja ( courtyard ) marked by a vatomasina ( sacred stone ) that elevated the sovereign above the people for the delivery of kabary ( royal speeches or decrees ) . The sovereign 's lodgings typically stood in the northern part of the rova , while the spouse or spouses lived in the southern part . 
 At Ambohimanga , as in other rova sites , the cardinal and vertical layout of these various traditional components embodies two cosmological notions of space that coexisted in traditional Imerina . The older system governed sociopolitical order and was based on the concept of the four cardinal points radiating from a unifying center . A more recent system introduced through the astrology of seafaring Arabs governed the spiritual order and placed special significance on the northeast . The sacred eastern portions of Ambohimanga contained structures associated with the veneration of the ancestors , including the royal tombs , basins of holy water used in royal rituals , and numerous Ficus and <unk> trees , which were symbolic of royalty . The northern portion of the site is the location of a courtyard where royal judgments were handed down from atop a prominent granite boulder , in line with the Malagasy association between the northern cardinal point , masculinity , and political power . The houses of the royal wives were formerly located in the southern portion of the site , a cardinal point traditionally associated with femininity and spiritual power . These competing cosmological systems are also reflected in the placement of the city 's main gates at cardinal points , as well as the northeastern gates reserved for use by the sovereign and dedicated to their role in sacred rituals . 
 The orientation and placement of many structures within Ambohimanga were copied from Ambohimanga 's older twin city , the rova at Antananarivo , which likewise embodies both traditional notions of space . The placement of the city of Ambohimanga relative to Antananarivo also reflects these systems . Centrally located Antananarivo is the nation 's political capital today , and Ambohimanga to its northeast is regarded as the spiritual capital . 
 Between these two systems , that of the political order predominates in the layout of Ambohimanga , and the sacredness of the city was historically more explicitly associated with its role as a political rather than an astrological center . The forbidding of foreigners from the site in the 19th century , for instance , was enacted to preserve the sanctity of the social and political order , rather than the religious order . By respecting these systems of symbolism , successive rulers sought to ensure the benediction of the ancestors , strengthen the legitimacy of their rule and ensure the protection and stability of their kingdom . However , adherence to cardinal division and symbolism of space is weaker at Ambohimanga than its embodiment of the significance of vertical space and elevation as an indicator of rank . The site of each new compound within the royal city was selected less for its cardinal direction than for the extent to which it was located on higher ground than the compound that predated it . 
 = = = Fortifications = = = 
 A series of protective trenches ( hadivory ) and stone walls , typical of fortified royal cities in Imerina since the 15th century , surround the village of Ambohimanga . The trenches vary in depth to a maximum of 30 meters ( 98 ft ) . The oldest trenches at the site , called <unk> , are located behind the modern @-@ day rova and appear to predate the reign of the hill 's first known king , Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana ; local tradition maintains that they were dug in the early 16th century on the command of King Andrianjaka , who may have used the site as a launching point for military offensives in his war against the Vazimba . Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana was the first to systematically establish a network of defenses around the hilltop settlement . This first king of Ambohimanga dug trenches around his Bevato compound , which was initially only accessible through a gateway he named Ambavahadikely . 
 The settlement was expanded by the construction of trenches bordering a second adjoining space to the northeast with two additional access points named <unk> and <unk> , the latter a natural gateway formed by two boulders . This latter entrance was most likely used to access the space even before the formal establishment of a royal city there , and is therefore considered by archaeologists to be the oldest gateway at the site . After the establishment of the rova , this entrance was reserved for use by the sovereign , a reflection of the spiritual significance of the northeastern direction and its association with the ancestors , whose benediction and hasina provided the basis for the sovereign 's power and legitimacy . It was also used to bring sacrificial cattle into the compound . Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana then expanded toward the west to a series of natural defenses , including stony cliffs and steep forested slopes that obviated the need to dig defensive trenches , and he constructed several additional gates that he named <unk> , <unk> and Ambavahadiantandranomasina . Andrianampoinimerina expanded the trenches around the city using fanampoana labor . During his reign , a trench was dug that entirely encircles the hill , and a series of trenches was dug alongside existing ones to further protect the city against enemies . The current defensive wall was reconstructed around 1830 during the reign of Queen Ranavalona I. An estimated sixteen million egg whites were mixed with lime to produce the whitewash for the compound 's exterior and interior walls . Until French colonization in 1897 and at least as early as the reign of Radama I , foreigners and non @-@ residents were not allowed to enter the royal city without authorization from the sovereign . 
 The royal compound can be accessed through fourteen stone gateways in total . In addition to the inner seven gateways constructed by Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana in the early 18th century , there exists an exterior wall and second set of seven gates that were built before 1794 during the reign of Andrianampoinimerina , an act that symbolically marked the completion of the king 's reunification of Imerina . The largest and principal gate is also the most well @-@ preserved and is known as <unk> ( " standing stone " ) . Every morning and evening , a team of twenty soldiers would work together to roll into place an enormous stone disk , 40 @.@ 5 meters in diameter and 30 cm thick , weighing about 12 tons , to open or seal off the doorway . This form of gate ( vavahady in the Malagasy language ) , typical of most walled royal villages of Imerina built between 1525 and 1897 , protected the villagers from <unk> gateway is topped by an observation post . The second main entrance , called <unk> , is situated in the western wall . Its stone disk is also intact , and the path leading to it is paved with cut stones . Both <unk> and <unk> were considered the gateways of the living ; cadavers could not be transported through them , and passage was denied to anyone who had recently come into contact with the dead . A northern gateway called <unk> retains its well @-@ preserved stone disk and was one of two entrances used whenever it was necessary to transport corpses in or out of the site ; the second gateway for corpses was called <unk> . The stone disk at the southern <unk> gateway is also in good condition . This gateway , as well as <unk> and <unk> , were primarily used as lookout points . In the late 18th century Andrianampoinimerina replaced the Ambavahadiantandranomasina gate with another made of wood instead of stone and renamed it Ambavahadimasina . He and his successors shaved a small piece of wood from this lintel to light the sacred hearth fire that played a ritual role in the traditional circumcision ceremony . The red soil inside the gate and a series of wooden boards that paneled the approach to the gate were both considered sacred , and soldiers or others who anticipated a voyage away from Imerina would take handfuls of the soil and pieces of the wooden boards with them before departing in the belief that it would ensure their safe return . 
 Several large stones are set in the ground near gates or at points outside the walls of Ambohimanga . Rulers would stand atop these stones , each identified by distinct names , to deliver speeches to the public . To the south were the stones called <unk> and <unk> , while <unk> was situated to the northwest . The latter stone was of particular importance : here the twelve leaders of the Ambatofotsy clan first declared their rejection of Andrianjafy 's rule and their allegiance to his nephew , Andrianampoinimerina . Upon taking the throne , Andrianampoinimerina used this site to first declare new laws and decrees that would later be announced throughout the kingdom . This was also the main site at Ambohimanga for dispensing justice . After Andrianampoinimerina 's succession to the throne , he sacrificed a black zebu whose mother had died , named <unk> ( " black one " ) , with repeated spear thrusts ; after its death , the animal was cut into pieces and buried on the site . <unk> was thereafter regularly invoked in royal speeches and decrees to allude to the fate of those who misguidedly sought to forsake the protection of their guardian , the sovereign , and his laws . 
 = = = Natural features = = = 
 Two sanctified , stone @-@ covered springs nearby feed a stream that is believed to hold powers of purification and flows through the buffer zone surrounding the royal city . Their water was used to form the sacred lake of <unk> , artificially created by at least the 18th century to provide water to fill two ceremonial pools constructed within the Ambohimanga compound . Oral history attributes the creation of the lake to Andrianampoinimerina . He reportedly engaged the labor of surrounding villagers to dig the lake at the site of the spring @-@ fed swamp at the base of the hill . Before initially filling the lake with water carried in baked earthen jars from the sacred sites of Alasora , <unk> and <unk> , the lake 's creation was sanctified by sacrificing zebu at the site ; Andrianampoinimerina is also said to have thrown pearls and silver rings into the lake to inaugurate it . 
 The forest at Ambohimanga benefited from customary protection and today represents the largest of the last remaining fragments of primary forest that formerly covered the highlands . It contains a representative assortment of native tree and plant species , in particular the endemic tree <unk> ( <unk> madagascariensis ) and a variety of indigenous medicinal plants , many possessing traditional or spiritual importance . Examples include the native bush <unk> , traditionally believed to attract lightning and often planted in clusters beside villages ; the Dracaena plant , traditionally used for hedges and planted at sacred sites in valleys or other natural features where people would come to communicate with ancestral spirits ; and the <unk> vine , which was planted in sacred thickets and harvested for its wood , which was traditionally used to fashion handles for diverse tools . The recent and growing presence of two foreign species ( golden bamboo and lantana ) threaten the integrity of the site 's ecosystem . The local management authority is currently engaged in activities to eradicate the encroaching vegetation . 
 = = = Villages = = = 
 The villages surrounding the royal city date back to at least the 16th century , when the valleys around Ambohimanga hill were first transformed into rice paddies . Following the establishment of a royal city on the hilltop , successive rulers put in place regulations to govern the development of these villages and manage the subjects inhabiting them . Under Andrianampoinimerina , quotas established a set number of houses for members of influential clans in designated neighborhoods around the hill . This king also established rules to improve sanitation , including standards of cleanliness in domestic courtyards and the quarantine of people suffering from certain illnesses . Ranavalona I specified the physical characteristics of newly constructed houses , including their size and decorative features . In 1862 Radama II gave permission to a group of Christians to negotiate with Tsimahafotsy elders to construct the village 's first church , but the Tsimahafotsy initially rejected the request . The king 's successor , Queen Rasoherina , later requested the Christians not to gather indoors for services at Ambohimanga in honor of the sanctity of the ancestors . The court was Christianized by Ranavalona II in 1869 , and a small chapel was built outside the city 's eastern gate , but a permanent church at Ambohimanga was not built until 1883 . Following a fire that occurred in 1870 during a visit of Ranavalona II to Ambohimanga , the queen decreed that houses in the village could be constructed in brick , a material previously reserved for tomb and wall construction . A series of ancestral fady ( taboos ) decreed by Andrianampoinimerina continue to apply in the village , and include prohibitions against corn , pumpkins , pigs , onions , hedgehogs and snails ; the use of reeds for cooking ; and the cutting or collecting of wood from the sacred forests on the hill . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 Each of the three compounds built within the rova by successive Merina rulers bears distinct architectural styles that reflect the dramatic changes experienced in Imerina over the reign of the 19th century Kingdom of Madagascar , which saw the arrival and rapid expansion of European influence at the royal court . The site contains a blend of traditional Merina and European styles and construction methods . The predominant architectural features and layout of the royal city follow the traditional model of rova construction that predominated in the Highlands from the 15th century . Following tradition , the homes of the living are constructed of wood and vegetation ( living materials ) , while the tombs of the dead are built in stone ( cold , inert material ) . The selection of specific wood and plant materials used in construction , each of which were imbued with distinct symbolic meaning , reflected traditional social norms and spiritual beliefs . Since 1996 , many of the buildings have undergone restoration using traditional materials and construction practices appropriate to the era in which the buildings were first erected . 
 = = = Bevato compound = = = 
 The earliest of the royal compounds at Ambohimanga , Bevato ( " many stones " , also called Fidasiana @-@ Bevato ) , was first established by Andriamborona , who built houses there for himself and his family in the late 17th century . It was inhabited by Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana from 1710 to 1730 , during which time he expanded the compound on three occasions . The compound was originally surrounded by a low rock wall that was replaced under Andriambelomasina by a wooden palisade . Ranavalona I expanded the compound toward the west by relocating a small house containing the royal idol Rafantaka ; further westward expansion was completed under Ranavalona II . Under Ranavalona I and her successors , Besakana served as the residence of the sovereign 's relatives during their visits to Ambohimanga . All buildings on the compound were destroyed by the French , who constructed a school on the site ( Ecole Officiel ) , later followed by the Ambohimanga town hall ( <unk> ) , which was razed after Madagascar regained independence . 
 Andriamborona , the first inhabitant of the hill , built a tomb for his mother in Bevato . When the king asked him to relocate , Andriamborona agreed to move both his houses and his mother 's tomb . In acknowledgement of this consideration , the king marked the site of the tomb with a large stone and nearby he built the first royal residence at the rova as his home . The stone was thereafter considered sacred : Andrianampoinimerina was enthroned while standing atop this stone , and slaves were brought there to swear allegiance to their masters . It was used in the ritual sacrifice of <unk> zebu during the Fandroana Malagasy New Year ( a festival also known as the " royal bath " ) . Sovereigns traveling on horseback would stand upon it to aid in mounting or dismounting , and after the Christianization of the court under Ranavalona II in 1869 , religious services took place here . The royal tombs were relocated to the Mahandrihono compound under Ranavalona I to expand the courtyard . 
 According to the Tantara ny Andriana eto Madagasikara transcription of Merina oral histories , the first house built by Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana was called Bevato . It was located at the southern extreme of the compound and housed the king and his wives . Andriambelomasina built and occupied a second house , called <unk> ( " large and great " ) . This house was highly venerated by Andrianampoinimerina : escaped convicts who managed to reach the building were pardoned , and this was the only historic house in the compound that Ranavalona I did not remove . According to a second source , the two oldest houses in the compound were called Mahitsielafanjaka ( " one who is upright rules long " ) and <unk> ( " small and great " ) . These were reportedly built by either Andriamborona or Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana in the early 18th century and were occupied by Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana and his 12 wives . Another account states that <unk> was inhabited by Andrianjafy and later by the wives of Andrianampoinimerina ; this house and Mahitsielafanjaka were renovated under Ranavalona I using wood from the region of Sihanaka to <unk> the walls . 
 Oral history credits Andrianampoinimerina with the construction of a second pair of houses in the compound . Beginning with his reign , Bevato became the second most important compound after Mahandrihono and enclosed four houses for royal wives and their servants . He also kept the royal idol <unk> here in a small house surrounded by a wooden palisade , which remained until the Christian convert Ranavalona II symbolically destroyed the royal idols in a bonfire in 1869 . After removing the historic Tsararay in the Mahandrihono compound , Andrianampoinimerina built a new house with the same name in the Bevato compound . Tsararay was the residence of his wives when they would make the journey to Ambohimanga . The Bevato compound in Antananarivo was likewise reserved for the sovereign 's wives under the reign of Andrianampoinimerina , but featured many more houses to enable each wife her own residence . When wives would travel to Ambohimanga they were obliged to share the houses , and those who preferred not to share typically stayed at the houses of villagers beyond the city walls . 
 Ranavalona I planted a pair of royal fig trees at the far end of the Bevato compound and stood between them when addressing the public . These were later complemented by additional fig trees planted all around the courtyard by Ranavalona II and jacarandas planted by the French during the colonial period . The figs that shade the esplanade are believed to be imbued with hasina enhanced by the bones and skulls of sacrificed zebu and special marking stones that pilgrims from across Madagascar , Mauritius , Reunion and Comoros have come to place around them . Pilgrims gather in this courtyard to celebrate the Fandroana ceremony , during which time the sovereign historically engaged in a ritual bath to wash away the sins of the nation and restore order and harmony to society . Today , pilgrims celebrate by offering sacrifices or prayers to honor , appease or commune with their ancestors . 
 While Bevato was the location of larger gatherings and royal festivals , royal edicts and public judgments were handed down in the sacred courtyard ( kianja ) of <unk> at the base of the hill leading to the Bevato compound . From the kianja sovereigns delivered kabary to announce new laws and decrees and administer justice . The sovereign would stand atop the kianja 's vatomasina ( a large granite boulder ) , which is surrounded by a brick half @-@ wall and accessed by a set of steps . 
 = = = Mahandrihono compound = = = 
 The compound Mahandrihono ( " knows how to wait " ) is the most expansive and well @-@ preserved of the rova structures at Ambohimanga . It lies to the east of the central courtyard and sits at a higher elevation than Bevato , symbolically representing its greater political significance . It was first established by Andriambelomasina in the early 18th century during the reign of his father , Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana . Andriambelomasina surrounded the compound with a stone wall and within it built three houses as residences for his children — two twin houses ( <unk> ) set side by side named <unk> ( " knows how to wait " ) and Tsararay ( " has a good father " ) , and a third named <unk> ( " has a father who rules " ) — taking pains to illustrate through the names of these houses that he had no intention of usurping his father . When Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana eventually died , Andriambelomasina entombed him behind the twin houses . In Andrianampoinimerina 's time this compound corresponded with the Mahandrihono compound at the rova in Antananarivo , being reserved for the king alone with his residence positioned beside the tombs of the ancestors . 
 Andrianampoinimerina removed the twin houses to build his much larger Mahandrihono residence , which was decorated with silver birds and chains . He also expanded the compound and added a second enclosure of <unk> wood ( replaced annually ) around the exterior of the stone walls . <unk> was removed and in its place Andrianampoinimerina built a house with a small tower , which he named Manjakamiadana ( " where it is good to rule " ) , designating it as the residence for the royal sampy ( idol ) called <unk> and the guardians assigned to protect it . Two other idols were kept nearby : <unk> , kept in a house in the Bevato compound , and Kelimalaza , guarded in its house at the Ambohimanga neighborhood of <unk> . Under Radama I , the stone wall was reinforced with palisades that enclosed three houses , two of which were twin houses like those that Andriambelomasina had built . Ranavalona I enlarged the compound 's courtyard and expanded Manjakamiadana . She constructed the stone walls that currently enclose the compound , as well as its two stone gateways . Ranavalona II re @-@ added palisades to the compound 's stone walls . She demolished Manjakamiadana and in its place constructed two hybrid Malagasy @-@ European pavilions using wood from the historic and spiritually significant Masoandro house , which had been removed from the royal compound of Antananarivo by Ranavalona I. French general Joseph Gallieni used these European @-@ influenced buildings as his summer residence in the early years of the French colonial period . In 2013 , Andrianampoinimerina 's original house , the reconstructed tombs , and the two royal pavilions are preserved in the compound , which also includes a watchtower , a pen for sacrificial zebu , and two pools constructed during the reign of Ranavalona I. 
 = = = = Mahandrihono palace = = = = 
 Among the buildings extant at the royal city during the time of King Andrianampoinimerina ( 1787 – 1810 ) , only the original Mahandrihono palace remains intact . The Mahandrihono palace , which served as the home of Andrianampoinimerina before he relocated the political capital of Imerina to Antananarivo , has been preserved in its original state since construction , excepting the replacement of the original roof thatch with wooden shingles . The simple wooden structure is constructed in the traditional style of the aristocracy of Imerina : the walls are made of solid rosewood and topped by a peaked roof that is supported by 10 @-@ meter central rosewood pillar , much like the one that had originally supported the roof of the Rova Manjakamiadana of Antananarivo before it was destroyed by fire in 1995 . The roof horns ( tandrotrano ) formed at each end of the roof peak by the crossing of the gable beams were originally silver @-@ plated , and a silver eagle was affixed in the middle of the roof peak . Silver ornaments were also hung from the corners of the roof in the interior of the house . The building 's name is inscribed on a white marble plaque affixed to an exterior wall near one of the building 's two entrances . This house contains a number of items that belonged to Andrianampoinimerina , including weapons , drums , talismans and a bed raised on stilts . During Andrianampoinimerina 's time , his wives were allowed to visit this building but not allowed to sleep there overnight . The site is highly sacred : Queen Rasoherina and her successors often sat on the stepping stone at its threshold to address their audience , and many pilgrims come here to connect with the spirits of Andrianampoinimerina and his ancestors . Visitors are asked to enter the house by stepping in with their right foot and exiting backwards , according to custom , in order to show respect for the spirit of Andrianampoinimerina . 
 = = = = Royal pavilions = = = = 
 Two ornate palace buildings were built of rosewood in this compound in 1871 on the former site of the Manjakamiadana royal idol residence . The first and larger of the two , <unk> , features a room for receiving visitors and a large salon on the ground floor , and the bedrooms of Queen Ranavalona II and her serving lady on the second floor . The original European furnishings have been preserved , and the many gifts given by foreign dignitaries to the queen are on display here . The queen 's bedroom is considered a sacred place and many visitors come on pilgrimage to pray to her spirit . 
 The second , smaller pavilion is known as the <unk> ( " house of glass " ) and was constructed in 1862 under the orders of Ranavalona II . The queen would gather her ministers for counsel in this building , and the large windows on all four sides of the building provided a view of the countryside below , enabling the queen to ascertain the security of her surroundings . The glass used in the construction was imported by an Englishman named Parrett in 1862 . 
 = = = = Royal tombs = = = = 
 The compound originally housed twelve royal tombs constructed in the style of Merina nobles , with a stone crypt topped by a small , windowless wooden house ( tranomasina ) indicative of aristocratic rank . The peaks of these tombs were aligned from north to south . Sovereigns originally buried in the four largest tombs , situated to the north of the others , included Andriantsimitoviaminiandriana , Andriambelomasina , <unk> , Ranavalona I and Ranavalona II , while the wives and relatives of sovereigns were buried in the smaller tombs . According to oral histories , at its 19th @-@ century peak the Ambohimanga compound contained 12 tombs . 
 The tranomasina were destroyed in March 1897 by French authorities who removed the bodies of the sovereigns interred here and relocated them to the royal tombs at the Rova of Antananarivo . The rich collection of funerary objects enclosed within the tombs was also removed for display in the Manjakamiadana palace on the Antananarivo rova grounds , which the Colonial Authority transformed into an ethnological museum . This was done in an effort to desanctify the city of Ambohimanga and break the spirit of the Menalamba resistance fighters who had been rebelling against French colonization for the past year , break popular belief in the power of the royal ancestors , and relegate Malagasy sovereignty under the Merina rulers to a relic of an unenlightened past . A French garrison was housed within the royal city and military buildings were erected on top of the stone tomb foundations . A kitchen and military canteen were built on top of the tombs of Andrianampoinimerina and Andriamasinavalona . By 1904 , the military buildings were likewise demolished , leaving the stone tomb foundations intact . 
 The desecration of the two most sacred sites of Merina royalty represented a calculated political move intended to establish the political and cultural superiority of the French colonial power . In the popular view , the link between Ambohimanga and the ancestors ( Andrianampoinimerina in particular ) rendered the royal city an even more potent symbol and source of legitimate power than the capital of Antananarivo , which was seen as having become a locus of corrupt politics and deviance from ancestral tradition . Believing that the presence of the ancestors within the tombs sanctified the earth upon which the rova was built , Menalamba resistance fighters would come to Ambohimanga to collect handfuls of dirt from the base of the tombs to carry with them in their offensives against the French ; the French authority intended by the removal of the sovereigns ' bodies from the tombs to undermine the fighters ' confidence and solidarity . Although the tombs were desecrated and the Menalamba fighters were ultimately defeated , Ambohimanga has retained its sacred character . The royal tombs were reconstructed in 2008 by the government of Madagascar under the Ravalomanana administration . During the 1995 fire that destroyed the tombs and other structures at the Rova of Antananarivo , the lamba @-@ wrapped remains of only one sovereign — Ranavalona III — could be saved from the flames . The queen has since been re @-@ interred in the royal tombs at Ambohimanga . 
 = = = = Other features = = = = 
 Two large basins have been carved from the stone foundation of the compound . Both constructed under Ranavalona I , one was a pool built in honor of the wives of soldiers of the ennobled Hova Tsimahafotsy clan of Ambohimanga , while the other was built for the wives of members of the elite military corps known as " the 500 " . The pools were strictly forbidden for public bathing or drinking and contained fish from Lake <unk> and specially consecrated water . Ranavalona I and her successors Radama I and Rasoherina used the larger royal pool for ritual purification during the annual fandroana new year festival . 
 Sacred zebu were kept in a sunken cattle pen ( <unk> ) to the west of the kianja courtyard before sacrifice at royal events such as circumcisions and the fandroana festival . Only the two most highly prized types of zebu were kept here : black zebu with white markings on the forehead , called <unk> , and entirely reddish @-@ brown zebu , called <unk> . In this way , the cattle were made to walk from the west toward the east ( the direction of the ancestors and sanctity ) before being slaughtered . Another large pen for sacrificial zebu was located to the northeast of this courtyard before being filled in by the French Colonial Authority in the late 19th century . 
