 = = = Nanjakana compound = = = 
 The Nanjakana compound is the most highly elevated of the three compounds in the rova at Ambohimanga . Located to the northeast of <unk> , this compound is believed to have been first constructed by Andrianjafy in the late eighteenth century . To the north of the compound is a stone esplanade that offers a clear view of the surrounding areas where Andrianampoinimerina reportedly came to reflect on his military strategy for bringing Imerina under his control . During the 1861 funeral of Queen Ranavalona I held in the Nanjakana compound , a spark accidentally ignited a nearby barrel of gunpowder destined for use in the ceremony , causing an explosion and fire that killed a number of bystanders and destroyed three of the compound 's historic royal residences . 
 During the reign of Andrianampoinimerina , Nanjakana enclosed five houses that served as residences for his children . The house called Nanjakana ( " place of royalty " ) was built by Andriambelomasina and renovated by Andrianampoinimerina , who moved it into the compound and lived in it before succeeding to the throne . He renovated it for use by his son , Radama I , who slept here during visits to Ambohimanga after succeeding his father as King of Madagascar . According to oral history , a large stone near the Nanjakana house was used as a seat by Andriambelomasina and Andrianampoinimerina when reflecting on governance decisions . Andrianampoinimerina added a two @-@ story house called <unk> ( " favored by fate " ) that was the largest of all the traditional houses at Ambohimanga . The king 's children slept on the upper floor during visits to the royal city , while the ground floor housed such royal property as palanquins and storage chests . This house was destroyed in the 1861 fire and was reconstructed under Rasoherina , who used it as a residence . After removing the historic <unk> house from the Mahandrihono compound , Andrianampoinimerina built a new house with the same name in the Nanjakana compound . This was likewise destroyed in the 1861 fire , and was later rebuilt by Ranavalona II . Also destroyed in the fire was a house called Fohiloha ( " short " ) that Ranavalona I had relocated from the royal compound in Antananarivo to the Nanjakana compound at Ambohimanga in 1845 ; Fohiloha was later rebuilt by Rasoherina . Other buildings that Ranavalona I moved from the rova at Antananarivo to the Nanjakana compound at Ambohimanga included Kelisoa ( " beautiful little one " ) and <unk> . 
 = = Conservation and management = = 
 A popular tourist destination , Ambohimanga received 97 @,@ 847 visitors in 2011 . Visitors to the World Heritage Site are charged a fee ( 10 @,@ 000 ariary for foreigners and 400 ariary for locals ) , which is largely used to pay for the preservation of the site . The commune of Ambohimanga Rova is a small but thriving rural village that lives on agriculture and services provided to tourists and pilgrims who visit the royal city . <unk> tour guides can be hired at the site to provide detailed descriptions of its features and history . Photographs are permitted outdoors but prohibited inside the historic buildings . Tourism has been negatively affected at the site as a consequence of the 2009 Malagasy political crisis ; management of the site has also been hampered by political instability and reduced revenues since 2009 . 
 The extent of the area currently classified a World Heritage Site was under restricted access and protection during the imperial era and has been under some form of legal recognition and protection since French colonization , having been incorporated into the Colony Domains Service in 1897 and the National Inventory in 1939 . It has since benefited from legal municipal protection and two national laws ( passed in 1982 and 1983 ) protecting sites of historical and national interest . The Office of the Cultural Site of Ambohimanga ( OSCAR ) , created by the Ministry of Culture , has managed the site and its entrance fees and state <unk> since 2006 , when a five @-@ year management plan was developed for implementation by the group 's 30 employees . These management and conservation activities are conducted in cooperation with the local population within the Rural Commune of Ambohimanga Rova . The Village Committee , comprising representatives of all the adjacent quarters and the local community , are also involved in the protection of the site . Conservation of Ambohimanga is further supported by a private association , <unk> , which has also been active in campaigning for awareness and protection of cultural heritage and has contributed to the preservation of numerous other sites of cultural and historic significance in the highlands . In addition to helping replant the Ambohimanga woodlands , <unk> has contributed to the restoration of the stones around the source of the spring , erected informational plaques around the hill , and paved a number of footpaths within the site . UNESCO contributed special financial support to restore historic structures at Ambohimanga threatened by exceptionally heavy rainfall and landslides . 
 Ambohimanga has been viewed by many Merina since the late 19th century as the embodiment of an ideal social order blessed by the ancestors . The significance attached to the site in Imerina increased further when its sister rova in Antananarivo was destroyed by fire in 1995 , contributing to a sense that Ambohimanga was the last remaining physical link to this sanctified past . A small intellectual elite among the Tsimahafotsy clan of Ambohimanga and the nobles ( andriana ) believe that only Ambohimanga possesses the ancestral benediction ( hasina ) to serve as the national capital and imbue national leaders with the legitimacy and wisdom needed to rightly govern the country . The descendents of the andriana have consequently been key in promoting and protecting Ambohimanga , such as by playing a significant role in successfully lobbying UNESCO to list Ambohimanga as a World Heritage Site . 
 Despite these measures , the conservation of Ambohimanga is challenged by human and natural factors . The rapidly growing but relatively impoverished population around Ambohimanga occasionally engages in illegal harvesting of plants and trees from the surrounding forests , threatening the integrity of the natural environment . The forests and wooden structures on the site are also susceptible to fire . Following the 1995 destruction by fire of Ambohimanga 's sister rova at Antananarivo , widely believed to have been a politically motivated arson , rumors have circulated that Ambohimanga could suffer a similar fate . Cyclone Giovanna , which passed over Madagascar in February 2012 , caused considerable damage at the site . The wooden shingles of Andrianampoinimerina 's house were torn off by the wind , exposing the historic objects inside to damage from the elements . The wooden fence surrounding the Mahandrihono compound was also badly damaged . Worst affected are the plants and trees at the site . Large swaths of endemic medicinal plants and trees in the forest were destroyed . Many of the sacred trees shading the royal city were uprooted , including sacred fig trees around the Fidasiana courtyard and inside the zebu pen . Two of the uprooted trees were of particular symbolic significance , having served as physical anchors for certain royal rituals since the 17th century . Shortly after the storm , OSCAR unveiled plans to plant a substitute fig for the uprooted one that had shaded the sacred stone in the Fidasiana courtyard . Most of the historic jacarandas planted over a century ago under French colonial rule were also destroyed . The extent of damage to the site has prompted traditionalists to demand renewed respect for the sanctity of the site by requesting adherence to traditional taboos put in place by Merina monarchs . These include banning pigs at the site , as well as the consumption of pork , tobacco , alcohol and cannabis on the grounds of the royal city . 
 = Battle of Caldera Bay = 
 The Battle of Caldera Bay , or the Sinking of the Blanco Encalada , was an engagement fought in the port of Caldera Bay during the 1891 Chilean Civil War between Balmacedist and Congressional naval forces on 23 April 1891 . It involved two Balmacedist torpedo boats , Almirante Lynch and Almirante Condell , and the Congressional armored frigate Blanco Encalada . 
 After both torpedoes from Almirante Condell had missed , Blanco Encalada was hit by a torpedo from Almirante Lynch and sank in minutes , with the loss of 182 men . The loss of Blanco Encalada hindered the Congressional forces , but they ultimately defeated the Balmacedist forces that August . Blanco Encalada was the first ironclad warship lost to a self @-@ propelled torpedo . The engagement prompted countries to rapidly grow both their torpedo boat and torpedo boat destroyer forces ( the latter commonly referred to as destroyers ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1891 , after a series of struggles about multinational nitrate interests , Chilean President José Manuel Balmaceda refused to sign the national budget passed by the Chilean National Congress . Balmaceda then dissolved Congress . The dissolution split both the Chilean Army and Navy , with some forces remaining loyal to Congress and others to the President . An armed conflict ensued after a mutiny by the navy , which at that time was docked at Valparaíso . 
 Supporters of those forces loyal to Congress , including members of the dissolved parliament and their backers among multinational nitrate interests , bought weaponry from Europe and the United States . Better equipped than the forces loyal to the President , they rapidly captured Chile 's northern provinces , which had recently been conquered from Bolivia and Peru during the War of the Pacific . 
 Since the Congressionalists controlled all of the current ships in the Chilean Navy , the <unk> commandeered vessels that were nearing completion in England and France , including the torpedo boats Almirante Condell and Almirante Lynch They were built by Laird Brothers , the same firm that built the Confederate raider Alabama thirty years before . Both Almirante Lynch and Almirante Condell carried an armament of five Whitehead torpedoes , two 14 @-@ pound ( 6 @.@ 4 kg ) guns in echelon on the forecastle and one on the poop , four 3 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 4 kg ) guns and two machine guns . Their maximum speed was around 21 knots . 
 The two ships arrived at Valparaíso on 21 March . Both ships docked at Quintero Bay on 18 April . While at Quintero , their commanding officers , Commander Carlos E. Moraga of the Almirante Condell and Commander Juan Fuentes of the Almirante Lynch , were informed of the possibility that Blanco Encalada , a <unk> frigate , was going to be in Caldera Bay in five days . The two commanders consulted with one another and sent their proposal to attack Blanco Encalada to the Balmacedist government , which was approved . 
 Blanco Encalada arrived at Caldera Bay on 22 April , under the command of Captain Goñi , escorting several transports . The troops on these ships landed and captured the surrounding railroad and town of Copiapó . At about 01 : 20 , Goñi returned to the Blanco Encalada . Although it was known that Balmacedist torpedo boats were nearby , the Congressionalists believed that they would not attack the transports . Because of this , torpedo nets were left onshore , and watertight bulkheads which would have isolated a hull breech were left open . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At 04 : 00 on 23 April , Almirante Condell set out toward Caldera Bay about 450 miles ( 720 km ) away , with Almirante Lynch 20 yards ( 18 m ) behind <unk> armed steamer Imperial traveled with the torpedo boats , taking up a position to the left of both boats . It was to wait some distance off Caldera , in order to escort the ships back home when the attack ended . Both torpedo boats entered Caldera at roughly 3 : 30 . When they were 500 yards ( 460 m ) from Blanco Encalada , both boats came under fire by rapid @-@ fire guns on board the frigate , which only had seven men stationed as guards . About 100 yards ( 91 m ) from Blanco Encalada , Almirante Condell fired her bow torpedo at the Congressional frigate . It missed and landed on the shore , unexploded . Moraga then turned the torpedo boat into the direct fire of the frigate and fired both his starboard torpedoes . The front torpedo hit , but failed to explode , and the rear torpedo passed clear under the frigate . 
 As all of Blanco Encalada 's guns were occupied by Almirante Condell , the crew did not notice Almirante Lynch approaching from the opposite direction of Almirante Condell . From 50 yards ( 46 m ) out , Almirante Lynch fired her bow torpedo , which missed , and then fired her forward starboard torpedo after executing a turning maneuver like Almirante Condell had done . The second torpedo struck Blanco Encalada , creating a hole roughly 7 by 15 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 by 4 @.@ 6 m ) . The ship sank within minutes , taking 182 men with it . Several of the men who escaped , including Captain Goñi , did so by clinging to animals in Blanco Encalada 's cargo hold , including a llama and a cow . 
 As she was sinking , the torpedo boats fired their 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns at the survivors , killing about forty . The torpedo boats also fired at the transport <unk> , which had been trying to rescue the surviving crew . Including Captain Goñi , 106 men survived out of the 288 <unk> entire engagement lasted nine minutes , and Blanco Encalada sank two minutes after the torpedo hit . As Lynch and Condell left the harbor , they spotted the transport Aconcagua , which they attacked with their 14 @-@ pounder guns ( after ruling out their Gatling guns due to their potential for overkill ) . The Aconcagua surrendered after an hour and a half battle , but the torpedo ships were unable to seize her due to an approaching ship which they thought was the Chilean cruiser Esmeralda . It turned out to be the neutral HMS Warspite . The Almirante Lynch was slightly damaged in the battle , suffering hits to her steam @-@ pipe and flooding in her aft compartment , but besides that , the two torpedo boats were undamaged . 
 = = Aftermath and impact on torpedo use = = 
 The sinking of Blanco Encalada led to an attack by Almirante Condell and Almirante Lynch on her sister ship , the Almirante Cochrane , at that time moored at Iquique . Almirante Cochrane retreated before any torpedoes were fired . On 28 August , the Balmacedist army was defeated at the Battle of La <unk> . Their army lost about 1 @,@ 000 men , and three days later Congressional forces marched into Santiago , effectively ending the Chilean Civil War . The Blanco Encalada underwent some re @-@ floating attempts after the war , which were ultimately unsuccessful , and she was left in Caldera Bay until being demolished in 1954 when a new bridge was under construction . The Chilean government launched another Blanco Encalada , a cruiser , in 1894 . 
 The battle had a wider impact on naval weapons development because Blanco Encalada was the first ironclad warship sunk by a self @-@ propelled torpedo . News of the attack spread and as a result of the action , navies of several major powers realized the potential of torpedoes as a cheap counter to expensive pre @-@ dreadnoughts , which led to the acceleration of submarine and torpedo boat production , the addition of torpedo nets to ships for use when they were moored in port , and the addition of torpedo tubes to surface ships . During the Russo @-@ Japanese War , over 300 self @-@ propelled torpedoes were fired , in one instance finishing off the already seriously damaged Russian flagship Knyaz Suvorov at the Battle of Tsushima . Torpedo boats also sank two armored cruisers and two destroyers during the course of the war . By the start of World War I , torpedo boats and submarines were in widespread use in many navies . 
 = Bird collections = 
 Bird collections are curated repositories of scientific specimens consisting of birds and their parts . They are a research resource for ornithology , the science of birds , and for other scientific disciplines in which information about birds is useful . These collections are archives of avian diversity and serve the diverse needs of scientific researchers , artists , and educators . Collections may include a variety of preparation types emphasizing preservation of feathers , skeletons , soft tissues , or ( increasingly ) some combination thereof . Modern collections range in size from small teaching collections , such as one might find at a nature reserve visitor center or small college , to large research collections of the world ’ s major natural history museums , the largest of which contain hundreds of thousands of specimens . Bird collections function much like libraries , with specimens arranged in drawers and cabinets in taxonomic order , curated by scientists who oversee the maintenance , use , and growth of collections and make them available for study through visits or loans . 
 = = History of bird collections = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 The roots of modern bird collections are found in the 18th- and 19th @-@ century explorations of Europeans intent on documenting global plant and animal diversity . It was a fashion to collect and display natural curiosities in Victorian England . Some wealthy cabinet naturalists were able to amass large collections using networks of field collectors . These early collections were not intended for scientific study and the collectors gave importance to aesthetics rather than scientific value . It grew into a more scientific pursuit much later . 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 Early scientific bird collections included those belonging to Pallas and Naumann in Germany , Latham and Tunstall in England and Adanson in France . Collections grew in size with increasing maritime activity , exploration and colonialism . For example , Charles Darwin collected over 400 bird specimens during his travels on the Beagle , and it was many years after his return to England that his bird collections from the Galapagos inspired ( in part ) his theory of evolution through natural selection . The Paris museum had 463 bird specimens in 1793 and this grew to <unk> in 1809 ; The Berlin museum had 2000 specimens in 1813 growing to 13 @,@ 760 around 1850 . In 1753 there were 1172 bird specimens in the museum established by Sir Hans Sloane but these appear to have perished before they moved to the British Museum . Early specimens from <unk> Cook 's voyages as well as those described by Latham in his General Synopsis of Birds ( 1781 – 1785 ) were also lost possibly due to poor preservation technique . The scale of collections grew to the point where they needed more space and full @-@ time curators . In the earliest days of ornithology , collecting was the dominant method of bird observation and study . This approach has diminished with the growth of the discipline . The use of mist @-@ netting and photography , blood sampling ( for DNA , immunological and other studies ) , the development of optics and the use of other new techniques for studying birds have reduced the need to collect specimens for research , yet collections continue to act as a vital shared resource for science ( particularly taxonomy ) and conservation . In an era of mass extinction , bird collections will evidence lost species . 
 = = Collection and preservation techniques = = 
 Historically , bird specimens were collected mostly using firearms . Shotguns with " dust " shot were preferred to reduce damage to the specimens . Today , specimens come from a variety of sources . Many ( perhaps most ) are salvaged from birds killed by window and communications tower strikes , domestic cats , by @-@ catch from fisheries , die @-@ offs from disease , vehicle strikes , and other accidental sources of mortality . However , the world 's bird collections have been argued to be inadequate in documenting avian diversity , from taxonomic , geographic , and temporal perspectives , with some parts of tropical regions considered under @-@ represented in particular museums . <unk> taxa continue to be actively collected by ornithologists , generally using either firearms or mist @-@ nets . Permitting agencies oversee these activities in most countries . 
 Techniques to preserve birds were attempted even from the early 16th century as shown in the writings of Conrad Gesner and Pierre Belon . Belon provided instructions on the removal of viscera and the use of salt to preserve bird specimens in his 1555 book on birds . These were further improved in the 17th century and a range of preservatives included ash ( potassium carbonate ) , salt , sulphur , alum , alcohol and various plant extracts were used . In the early days of bird collections , most specimens were mounted in unrealistic positions often with their wings raised as if they were about to take flight . These were kept in the open and the colours were prone to fading and the specimens themselves prone to damage by beetles . In Berlin , J. L. Frisch started using tightly enclosed glass jars for every mount to prevent pest damage . During this time , Comte de <unk> at the Paris Museum had managed to find techniques to preserve specimens without loss of colour . This technique was however a secret and similar results were later achieved by pickling using salt , ground pepper and alum and drying for a month with threads holding the bird in a natural position . In modern collections , salvaged or collected birds may be preserved in a number of ways . The most traditional preparation is a study skin , in which almost all of the body inside the skin is removed and replaced with cotton so that the final result resembles a bird lying on its back with its wings folded . This stereotypic posture was developed to enable many skins to be kept together in cabinets to protect them from insect and light damage . If a complete skeleton is desired , a flat skin may be prepared : all bones , muscle , digestive and other soft tissue is carefully removed and the feathers and skin are stretched flat and dried . 
 A more recent preparation method pioneered by the Royal Ontario Museum removes all bones for a complete skeleton while also producing a round skin without bill or legs ( called a ROM , though if one set of wing and leg bones remain with the skin the preparation is called a <unk> in North America ) . Alternatively , the entire bird ( or any soft parts associated with preparations described above ) may be preserved in alcohol . For any of these methods , several supplemental preparations may be made . For example , a wing may be removed and preserved separately as a spread wing for better study of flight feathers ; a tissue sample may be removed and frozen for molecular analyses ; or a recording of the bird 's song before collection may be archived . Neither molecular samples nor sound recordings require a bird to be collected ( killed ) . Finally , if the bird is too rotten for the skin and feathers to be preserved , as is the case with some salvaged specimens , the skeleton alone may be preserved . Dried tissue is removed from skeletons by using <unk> beetle larvae ( genus <unk> ) . Whereas in the past arsenic was routinely added to skins to protect them from destruction by insects , specimens prepared today are generally protected by an initial freezing period to kill insects and their eggs followed by keeping them in high @-@ quality museum cases in a climate @-@ controlled room . Each specimen has data associated with it , and the amount of data available is usually directly correlated with the specimen ’ s scientific value . Most specimens are of little value for research without accompanying information , such as the time and place the bird was found or collected . This and other important information , such as mass , sex , fat deposition , and degree of skull ossification , is written on a label along with a unique field and museum number . Modern computerized museum databases include all of this information for each specimen , as well as the types of methods used to prepare the bird . Modern collections seek to maximize the utility of each preserved individual , and this includes recording detailed information about it . Most modern specimens also include a tissue sample preserved for genetic study . Online access to collections ’ data is becoming increasingly available , and a cross @-@ institutional database covering millions of computerized bird records is in development . 
 = = Uses of bird collections = = 
 Bird collections are used for a wide variety of purposes . All biological species including those of birds are represented by a holotype , the vast majority of which are full specimens ( mostly skins ) and in modern times explicitly designated in the original description of the taxon . All other putative members of the species may be compared to the holotype to confirm their identification . Rigorous studies of avian taxonomy are based on specimens from bird collections . Taxonomic studies rely on morphological and genetic characters to determine species limits and evolutionary relationships . Museum specimens have been the preferred source for scoring these characteristics , as they allow studies to be replicated – anyone may go back and repeat the study using the same specimens to verify the conclusions . 
 In the case of molecular studies , the preservation of a specimen that can vouch for the source of the tissue sample used to gather genetic data has been recommended , as genetic analysis often yields surprising results that make reexamination of the original specimen crucial . 
 Studies on ectoparasites , usually obtained during capture , but also obtained from old museum specimens , are valuable for studies on coevolution and <unk> . However , it has alternatively been argued that such re @-@ examination can be undertaken from archived photographs without killing the study piece . 
 In addition to taxonomic research , collections can provide information relevant to the study of variety of other ornithological questions , including comparative anatomy , ecology , behavior , disease , and conservation . Forensic ornithologists use collections to identify species involved in aircraft bird strikes , imported materials containing bird parts , and birds killed through various human activities , legal and illegal . In addition , collections are used by <unk> to identify bird bones at prehistoric human sites or species of origin for feathers used in human cultural artifacts . Collections also have been heavily used by artists , particularly for the production of plates for ornithological field guides . The close @-@ up observation and opportunity for manipulation provided by preserved study skins makes them , together with field observations and photography , to be an important basis for painters of field guide plates of birds . Most bird species have several unique plumages that distinguish immature from adults , males from females , and breeders from non @-@ breeders . Thus , many different specimens may be required to produce a thorough plate for identification of a given species . Accurate colour measurements using spectrometry are possible from specimens . 
 Bird collections have been useful for retrospective studies . Bird collections offer the potential for current and future researchers to make in @-@ depth morphological and molecular study of past avian diversity . One of the earliest and most famous examples of this was the use of egg collections from the 19th and early 20th centuries in determining that the pesticide DDT was producing eggshell @-@ thinning in raptors . The ornithologists who collected the eggs could never have known that their work would one day help establish causes for declines and help in making conservation strategies to save bird such as peregrine falcons from possible extinction . 
 As threats to bird populations grow and extinctions continue , historical specimens are valuable in documenting the impacts of human activities and causes of decline for threatened species . Other possible uses for bird specimens not known today may arise in the future . 
 = = Collection debates = = 
 The issue of whether birds should continue to be actively collected for research has been the subject of some debate among ornithologists ( examples of this can be found in the lively exchanges between Remsen and <unk> & <unk> , between Vuilleumier and Donegan , and between Dubois & <unk> and Donegan ) . Those opposed to collecting believe that much of current collecting is unnecessary , arguably motivated by the personal field scores of individuals or by competition between museums , rather than the result of a strict scientific rationale ; that collecting , in extreme cases of species on the verge of extinction , can pose a threat to bird populations ; and that in many cases in which the necessity of specimens is claimed , new technology such as digital photography and blood sample analysis of mist @-@ netted individuals could instead be used . Finally , at a time of rampant deforestation and species extinctions , scientists and conservationists should take the lead in providing an example to local people not to kill or hunt birds . Where other techniques not involving killing of a bird are feasible , to take a specimen is viewed by some as simply unethical . Proponents of collecting counter @-@ argue that compared to the many millions of birds killed each year by habitat destruction , domestic cats , window strikes , and tower kills , scientists collect only a few thousand birds per year worldwide and populations will quickly recover from an episode of collecting as long as their habitat remains . Supporters of continued collecting also point to the greater scientific utility and legacy of museum specimens compared to blood samples or photographs , and argue that collecting for research offers the only source of avian mortality with a positive outcome for birds in terms of the biological knowledge gained . Although taking small blood samples from wild birds is often viewed as a harmless alternative to collecting , it reduces survival by as much as 33 % and does not provide the benefits of a voucher specimen . Scientists have pointed out that bird populations represent renewable resources , and that scientific collecting represents only a tiny and non @-@ additive proportion of annual bird mortality . However , examples exist of species whose extinction was directly contributed to by museum collecting ( e.g. Guadalupe caracara , ivory @-@ billed woodpecker ) . 
 = Gervase de Cornhill = 
 Gervase de Cornhill ( sometimes Gervase of Cornhill ; c . 1110 @-@ c . 1183 ) was an Anglo @-@ Norman royal official and sheriff . Beginning his royal service as a justice in London in 1147 , he continued to serve both King Stephen of England and Henry II until his death around 1183 . He played a minor role in the Becket controversy in 1170 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 According to the medievalist Katharine Keats @-@ Rohan , Gervase was the son of Roger , who was the nephew of Hubert the queen 's chamberlain . Other scholars are less sure that Gervase was Roger 's son , and argue that Gervase was Hubert 's nephew . Gervase was likely born around 1110 . He married Agnes , the daughter of Edward of Cornhill . After his marriage , he became known as de Cornhill because of his wife 's property . 
 = = Royal administrator = = 
 Gervase was royal justice in London in 1147 , and continued to claim that title through the 1170s on his personal seal . He was one of the members of the royal administration under King Stephen of England . Gervase was also a merchant and financier . Around 1143 he loaned money to Stephen 's wife Matilda of Boulogne , and received in pledge land at <unk> in Cambridgeshire . The queen was unable to repay the debt , and the lands pledged eventually became Gervase 's . Gervase also loaned money to Hugh Tirel , son of Walter Tirel , in 1146 to enable Hugh to go on the Second Crusade . In return , Hugh pledged the manor of Langham in Essex to Gervase . 
 Gervase held the office of Sheriff of London in 1155 through 1157 , 1160 and 1161 , and may have held that office between 1159 and 1160 as well . He also held the office of Sheriff of Surrey from 1163 until his death as well as the office of Sheriff of Kent from 1167 to 1174 . Gervase was named a judge on one of the eyre circuits in 1170 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In 1170 , Gervase was involved with attempts to keep Thomas Becket , who had been in exile , from returning to England . Working with Gervase were Roger de Pont L 'Évêque the Archbishop of York , Gilbert Foliot the Bishop of London , Josceline de Bohon the Bishop of Salisbury , Reginald de Warenne the Sheriff of Sussex , and Ranulf de Broc . Gervase was part of the party that met Becket at Sandwich on 1 December 1070 when the archbishop returned to England . The lay members of the group , led by Gervase , complained that the archbishop was sowing dissension in the land by his excommunication of the three ecclesiastics who were with the group , but Becket managed to calm the officials by stating he would consider the matter and reply to them the next day . The next day the group was accompanied by some clergy sent by the ecclesiastics who had been excommunicated by Becket . Nothing further was accomplished by this meeting except further offers from Becket to consider other options . Afterwards , Gervase and Ranulf de Broc tried to discover which of the citizens of London had welcomed Becket back into the kingdom , but were frustrated by refusal of the London clergy to appear and by the laymen refusing to answer to anything but royal writs . 
 Gervase may be identical with the Gervase who in 1174 presented a loyalty speech to King Henry II from the citizens of London . In 1177 Gervase , along with Richard de Luci , the justiciar and Roger <unk> , assessed land taxes and heard judicial cases in Middlesex and Hampshire . 
 Gervase held lands in London inherited from his father @-@ in @-@ law , lands in Kent from his father , and lands in <unk> which he got through a mortgage . He also acquired other lands in Essex and Surrey . He also gave lands at Greenwich and East Lewisham to St. Peter 's Abbey in Ghent and other lands to Holy Trinity Priory at Aldgate . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Gervase died between Michaelmas in 1183 and Michaelmas 1184 . Gervase 's offspring were Henry , Reginald ( or Rainald ) , and Ralph . Ralph was also Sheriff of Kent ( 1191 – 1192 ) and Surrey ( 1191 – 1194 ) . The medieval writer William of Canterbury stated of Gervase that he was " thinking of his <unk> two @-@ thirds and hundredths rather than of what was good and right " . 
 = Exoplanet = 
 An exoplanet or extrasolar planet is a planet that orbits a star other than the Sun . Starting in 1988 , and as of 15 July 2016 , there have been 3 @,@ 472 exoplanets in 2 @,@ 597 planetary systems and 589 multiple planetary systems confirmed . HARPS ( since 2004 ) has discovered about a hundred exoplanets while the Kepler space telescope ( since 2009 ) has found more than two thousand . Kepler has also detected a few thousand candidate planets , of which about 11 % may be false positives . On average , there is at least one planet per star , with a percentage having multiple planets . About 1 in 5 Sun @-@ like stars have an " Earth @-@ sized " planet in the habitable zone , with the nearest expected to be within 12 light @-@ years distance from Earth . Assuming 200 billion stars in the Milky Way , that would be 11 billion potentially habitable Earth @-@ sized planets in the Milky Way , rising to 40 billion if planets orbiting the numerous red dwarfs are included . 
 The least massive planet known is <unk> ( formally PSR B1257 + 12 A ) , which is about twice the mass of the Moon . The most massive planet listed on the NASA Exoplanet Archive is <unk> @-@ P <unk> @-@ <unk> b , about 29 times the mass of Jupiter , although according to some definitions of a planet , it is too massive to be a planet and may be a brown dwarf instead . There are planets that are so near to their star that they take only a few hours to orbit and there are others so far away that they take thousands of years to orbit . Some are so far out that it is difficult to tell whether they are gravitationally bound to the star . Almost all of the planets detected so far are within the Milky Way , but there have also been a few possible detections of extragalactic planets . 
 The discovery of exoplanets has intensified interest in the search for extraterrestrial life . There is special interest in planets that orbit in a star 's habitable zone , where it is possible for liquid water , a prerequisite for life on Earth , to exist on the surface . The study of planetary habitability also considers a wide range of other factors in determining the suitability of a planet for hosting life . 
 Besides exoplanets , there are also rogue planets , which do not orbit any star and which tend to be considered separately , especially if they are gas giants , in which case they are often counted , like WISE 0855 − 0714 , as sub @-@ brown dwarfs . The rogue planets in the Milky Way possibly number in the billions ( or more ) . 
 = = Definition = = 
 = = = IAU = = = 
 The official definition of " planet " used by the International Astronomical Union ( IAU ) only covers the Solar System and thus does not apply to exoplanets . As of April 2011 , the only defining statement issued by the IAU that pertains to exoplanets is a working definition issued in 2001 and modified in 2003 . That definition contains the following criteria : 
 Objects with true masses below the limiting mass for thermonuclear fusion of deuterium ( currently calculated to be 13 Jupiter masses for objects of solar metallicity ) that orbit stars or stellar remnants are " planets " ( no matter how they formed ) . The minimum mass / size required for an extrasolar object to be considered a planet should be the same as that used in the Solar System . 
 Substellar objects with true masses above the limiting mass for thermonuclear fusion of deuterium are " brown dwarfs " , no matter how they formed or where they are located . 
 Free @-@ floating objects in young star clusters with masses below the limiting mass for thermonuclear fusion of deuterium are not " planets " , but are " sub @-@ brown dwarfs " ( or whatever name is most appropriate ) . 
 = = = Alternatives = = = 
 However , the IAU 's working definition is not universally accepted . One alternate suggestion is that planets should be distinguished from brown dwarfs on the basis of formation . It is widely thought that giant planets form through core accretion , which may sometimes produce planets with masses above the deuterium fusion threshold ; massive planets of that sort may have already been observed . Brown dwarfs form like stars from the direct collapse of clouds of gas and this formation mechanism also produces objects that are below the 13 MJup limit and can be as low as 1 MJup . Objects in this mass range that orbit their stars with wide separations of hundreds or thousands of AU and have large star / object mass ratios likely formed as brown dwarfs ; their atmospheres would likely have a composition more similar to their host star than accretion @-@ formed planets which would contain increased abundances of heavier elements . Most directly imaged planets as of April 2014 are massive and have wide orbits so probably represent the low @-@ mass end of brown dwarf formation . 
 Also , the 13 @-@ Jupiter @-@ mass cutoff does not have precise physical significance . Deuterium fusion can occur in some objects with a mass below that cutoff . The amount of deuterium fused depends to some extent on the composition of the object . The Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia includes objects up to 25 Jupiter masses , saying , " The fact that there is no special feature around 13 MJup in the observed mass spectrum reinforces the choice to forget this mass limit " . The Exoplanet Data Explorer includes objects up to 24 Jupiter masses with the advisory : " The 13 Jupiter @-@ mass distinction by the IAU Working Group is physically unmotivated for planets with rocky cores , and observationally problematic due to the sin i ambiguity . " The NASA Exoplanet Archive includes objects with a mass ( or minimum mass ) equal to or less than 30 Jupiter masses . Another criterion for separating planets and brown dwarfs , rather than deuterium fusion , formation process or location , is whether the core pressure is dominated by coulomb pressure or electron degeneracy pressure with the dividing line at around 5 Jupiter masses . Another suggestion , based on mass – density relationships , is that the dividing line should be at 60 Jupiter masses . 
 = = History of detection = = 
 For centuries philosophers and scientists supposed that extrasolar planets existed , but there was no way of detecting them or of knowing their frequency or how similar they might be to the planets of the Solar System . Various detection claims made in the nineteenth century were rejected by astronomers . The first confirmed detection came in 1992 , with the discovery of several terrestrial @-@ mass planets orbiting the pulsar PSR B1257 + 12 . The first confirmation of an exoplanet orbiting a main @-@ sequence star was made in 1995 , when a giant planet was found in a four @-@ day orbit around the nearby star 51 Pegasi . Some exoplanets have been imaged directly by telescopes , but the vast majority have been detected through indirect methods such as the transit method and the radial @-@ velocity method . 
 = = = Early speculations = = = 
 In the sixteenth century the Italian philosopher Giordano Bruno , an early supporter of the Copernican theory that Earth and other planets orbit the Sun ( heliocentrism ) , put forward the view that the fixed stars are similar to the Sun and are likewise accompanied by planets . 
 In the eighteenth century the same possibility was mentioned by Isaac Newton in the " General Scholium " that concludes his Principia . Making a comparison to the Sun 's planets , he wrote " And if the fixed stars are the centers of similar systems , they will all be constructed according to a similar design and subject to the dominion of One . " 
 In 1952 , more than 40 years before the first hot Jupiter was discovered , Otto Struve wrote that there is no compelling reason why planets could not be much closer to their parent star than is the case in the Solar System , and proposed that Doppler spectroscopy and the transit method could detect super @-@ Jupiters in short orbits . 
 = = = Discredited claims = = = 
 Claims of exoplanet detections have been made since the nineteenth century . Some of the earliest involve the binary star 70 Ophiuchi . In 1855 Capt. W. S. Jacob at the East India Company 's Madras Observatory reported that orbital anomalies made it " highly probable " that there was a " planetary body " in this system . In the 1890s , Thomas J. J. See of the University of Chicago and the United States Naval Observatory stated that the orbital anomalies proved the existence of a dark body in the 70 Ophiuchi system with a 36 @-@ year period around one of the stars . However , Forest Ray Moulton published a paper proving that a three @-@ body system with those orbital parameters would be highly unstable . During the 1950s and 1960s , Peter van de Kamp of Swarthmore College made another prominent series of detection claims , this time for planets orbiting Barnard 's Star . Astronomers now generally regard all the early reports of detection as erroneous . 
 In 1991 Andrew Lyne , M. <unk> and S. L. <unk> claimed to have discovered a pulsar planet in orbit around PSR 1829 @-@ 10 , using pulsar timing variations . The claim briefly received intense attention , but Lyne and his team soon retracted it . 
 = = = Confirmed discoveries = = = 
 As of 15 July 2016 , a total of 3 @,@ 472 confirmed exoplanets are listed in the Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia , including a few that were confirmations of controversial claims from the late 1980s . The first published discovery to receive subsequent confirmation was made in 1988 by the Canadian astronomers Bruce Campbell , G. A. H. Walker , and Stephenson Yang of the University of Victoria and the University of British Columbia . Although they were cautious about claiming a planetary detection , their radial @-@ velocity observations suggested that a planet orbits the star Gamma Cephei . Partly because the observations were at the very limits of instrumental capabilities at the time , astronomers remained skeptical for several years about this and other similar observations . It was thought some of the apparent planets might instead have been brown dwarfs , objects intermediate in mass between planets and stars . In 1990 additional observations were published that supported the existence of the planet orbiting Gamma Cephei , but subsequent work in 1992 again raised serious doubts . Finally , in 2003 , improved techniques allowed the planet 's existence to be confirmed . 
 On 9 January 1992 , radio astronomers Aleksander Wolszczan and Dale Frail announced the discovery of two planets orbiting the pulsar PSR 1257 + 12 . This discovery was confirmed , and is generally considered to be the first definitive detection of exoplanets . Follow @-@ up observations solidified these results , and confirmation of a third planet in 1994 revived the topic in the popular press . These pulsar planets are thought to have formed from the unusual remnants of the supernova that produced the pulsar , in a second round of planet formation , or else to be the remaining rocky cores of gas giants that somehow survived the supernova and then decayed into their current orbits . 
 On 6 October 1995 , Michel Mayor and Didier Queloz of the University of Geneva announced the first definitive detection of an exoplanet orbiting a main @-@ sequence star , namely the nearby G @-@ type star 51 Pegasi . This discovery , made at the Observatoire de Haute @-@ Provence , ushered in the modern era of exoplanetary discovery . Technological advances , most notably in high @-@ resolution spectroscopy , led to the rapid detection of many new exoplanets : astronomers could detect exoplanets indirectly by measuring their gravitational influence on the motion of their host stars . More extrasolar planets were later detected by observing the variation in a star 's apparent luminosity as an orbiting planet passed in front of it . 
 Initially , most known exoplanets were massive planets that orbited very close to their parent stars . Astronomers were surprised by these " hot Jupiters " , because theories of planetary formation had indicated that giant planets should only form at large distances from stars . But eventually more planets of other sorts were found , and it is now clear that hot Jupiters are a minority of exoplanets . In 1999 , Upsilon Andromedae became the first main @-@ sequence star known to have multiple planets . Kepler @-@ 16 contains the first discovered planet that orbits around a binary main @-@ sequence star system . 
 On 26 February 2014 , NASA announced the discovery of 715 newly verified exoplanets around 305 stars by the Kepler Space Telescope . These exoplanets were checked using a statistical technique called " verification by multiplicity " . Prior to these results , most confirmed planets were gas giants comparable in size to Jupiter or larger as they are more easily detected , but the Kepler planets are mostly between the size of Neptune and the size of Earth . 
 On 23 July 2015 , NASA announced Kepler @-@ <unk> , a near @-@ Earth @-@ size planet orbiting the habitable zone of a G2 @-@ type star . 
 = = = Candidate discoveries = = = 
 As of March 2014 , NASA 's Kepler mission had identified more than 2 @,@ 900 planetary candidates , several of them being nearly Earth @-@ sized and located in the habitable zone , some around Sun @-@ like stars . 
 = = Detection methods = = 
 = = = Direct imaging = = = 
 Planets are extremely faint compared to their parent stars . For example , a Sun @-@ like star is about a billion times brighter than the reflected light from any exoplanet orbiting it . It is difficult to detect such a faint light source , and furthermore the parent star causes a glare that tends to wash it out . It is necessary to block the light from the parent star in order to reduce the glare while leaving the light from the planet detectable ; doing so is a major technical challenge which requires extreme <unk> stability . 
 All exoplanets that have been directly imaged are both large ( more massive than Jupiter ) and widely separated from their parent star . Most of them are also very hot , so that they emit intense infrared radiation ; the images have then been made at infrared where the planet is brighter than it is at visible wavelengths . During the gas @-@ accretion phase of giant @-@ planet formation the star – planet contrast may be even better in H alpha than it is in infrared — an H alpha survey is currently underway . 
 Specially designed direct @-@ imaging instruments such as Gemini Planet Imager , VLT @-@ <unk> , and <unk> will image dozens of gas giants , however the vast majority of known extrasolar planets have only been detected through indirect methods . The following are the indirect methods that have proven useful : 
 = = = Indirect methods = = = 
 Transit method 
 If a planet crosses ( or transits ) in front of its parent star 's disk , then the observed brightness of the star drops by a small amount . The amount by which the star dims depends on its size and on the size of the planet , among other factors . This method suffers from a substantial rate of false positives and confirmation from another method is usually considered necessary . The transit method reveals the radius of a planet , and it has the benefit that it sometimes allows a planet 's atmosphere to be investigated through spectroscopy . Because the transit method requires that part of the planet 's orbit intersect a line @-@ of @-@ sight between the host star and Earth , the probability that an exoplanet in a randomly oriented orbit will be observed to transit the star is somewhat small . The Kepler telescope uses this method . 
 Radial velocity or Doppler method 
 As a planet orbits a star , the star also moves in its own small orbit around the system 's center of mass . Variations in the star 's radial velocity — that is , the speed with which it moves towards or away from Earth — can be detected from displacements in the star 's spectral lines due to the Doppler effect . Extremely small radial @-@ velocity variations can be observed , of 1 m / s or even somewhat less . This method has the advantage of being applicable to stars with a wide range of characteristics . One of its disadvantages is that it cannot determine a planet 's true mass , but can only set a lower limit on that mass . However , if the radial velocity of the planet itself can be distinguished from the radial velocity of the star , then the true mass can be determined . 
 Transit timing variation ( <unk> ) 
 When multiple planets are present , each one slightly perturbs the others ' orbits . Small variations in the times of transit for one planet can thus indicate the presence of another planet , which itself may or may not transit . For example , variations in the transits of the planet Kepler @-@ 19b suggest the existence of a second planet in the system , the non @-@ transiting Kepler @-@ <unk> . If multiple transiting planets exist in one system , then this method can be used to confirm their existence . In another form of the method , timing the eclipses in an eclipsing binary star can reveal an outer planet that orbits both stars ; as of August 2013 , a few planets have been found in that way with numerous planets confirmed with this method . 
 Transit duration variation ( <unk> ) 
 When a planet orbits multiple stars or if the planet has moons , its transit time can significantly vary per transit . Although no new planets or moons have been discovered with this method , it is used to successfully confirm many transiting circumbinary planets . 
 Gravitational microlensing 
 Microlensing occurs when the gravitational field of a star acts like a lens , magnifying the light of a distant background star . Planets orbiting the lensing star can cause detectable anomalies in the magnification as it varies over time . Unlike most other methods which have detection bias towards planets with small ( or for resolved imaging , large ) orbits , microlensing method is most sensitive to detecting planets around 1 – 10 AU away from Sun @-@ like stars . 
 Astrometry 
 Astrometry consists of precisely measuring a star 's position in the sky and observing the changes in that position over time . The motion of a star due to the gravitational influence of a planet may be observable . Because the motion is so small , however , this method has not yet been very productive . It has produced only a few disputed detections , though it has been successfully used to investigate the properties of planets found in other ways . 
 Pulsar timing 
 A pulsar ( the small , <unk> remnant of a star that has exploded as a supernova ) emits radio waves extremely regularly as it rotates . If planets orbit the pulsar , they will cause slight anomalies in the timing of its observed radio pulses . The first confirmed discovery of an extrasolar planet was made using this method . But as of 2011 , it has not been very productive ; five planets have been detected in this way , around three different pulsars . 
 Variable star timing ( pulsation frequency ) 
 Like pulsars , there are some other types of stars which exhibit periodic activity . Deviations from the periodicity can sometimes be caused by a planet orbiting it . As of 2013 , a few planets have been discovered with this method . 
 Reflection / emission modulations 
 When a planet orbits very close to the star , it catches a considerable amount of starlight . As the planet orbits around the star , the amount of light changes due to planets having phases from Earth 's viewpoint or planet glowing more from one side than the other due to temperature differences . 
 Relativistic beaming 
 Relativistic beaming measures the observed flux from the star due to its motion . The brightness of the star changes as the planet moves closer or further away from its host star . 
 <unk> variations 
 Massive planets close to their host stars can slightly deform the shape of the star . This causes the brightness of the star to slightly deviate depending how it is rotated relative to Earth . 
 <unk> 
 With <unk> method , a polarized light reflected off the planet is separated from <unk> light emitted from the star . No new planets have been discovered with this method although a few already discovered planets have been detected with this method . 
 Circumstellar disks 
 Disks of space dust surround many stars , thought to originate from collisions among asteroids and comets . The dust can be detected because it absorbs starlight and re @-@ emits it as infrared radiation . Features in the disks may suggest the presence of planets , though this is not considered a definitive detection method . 
 = = Nomenclature = = 
 = = = Proper names = = = 
 Most exoplanets have catalog names that are explained in the following sections , but in July 2014 the IAU launched a process for giving proper names to exoplanets . The process involved public nomination and voting for the new names , the results of which were announced in December 2015 . The planets so named were <unk> [ sic ] , <unk> , Arion , <unk> , Brahe , Dagon , <unk> , <unk> , Dulcinea , <unk> , Galileo , Harriot , Hypatia , Janssen , Lippershey , Majriti , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Poltergeist , Quijote , Rocinante , Saffar , Samh , <unk> , Sancho , <unk> , Tadmor , Taphao Kaew , Taphao Thong and <unk> . 
 The decision to give the planets new names followed the private company <unk> 's exoplanet naming contest , which the IAU harshly criticized . Previously a few planets had received unofficial names : notably Osiris ( HD 209458 b ) , Bellerophon ( 51 Pegasi b ) , and Methuselah ( PSR B1620 @-@ 26 b ) . 
 = = = Multiple @-@ star standard = = = 
 The convention for naming exoplanets is an extension of the one used by the Washington Multiplicity Catalog ( WMC ) for multiple @-@ star systems , and adopted by the International Astronomical Union . The brightest member of a star system receives the letter " A " . Distinct components not contained within " A " are labeled " B " , " C " , etc . <unk> are designated by one or more suffixes with the primary label , starting with lowercase letters for the second hierarchical level and then numbers for the third . For example , if there is a triple star system in which two stars orbit each other closely with a third star in a more distant orbit , the two closely orbiting stars would be named Aa and Ab , whereas the distant star would be named B. For historical reasons , this standard is not always followed : for example Alpha Centauri A , B and C are not labelled Alpha Centauri Aa , Ab and B. 
 = = = Extrasolar planet standard = = = 
 Following an extension of the above standard , an exoplanet 's name is normally formed by taking the name of its parent star and adding a lowercase letter . The first planet discovered in a system is given the designation " b " and later planets are given subsequent letters . If several planets in the same system are discovered at the same time , the closest one to the star gets the next letter , followed by the other planets in order of orbital size . 
 For instance , in the 55 Cancri system the first planet – 55 Cancri b – was discovered in 1996 ; two additional farther planets were simultaneously discovered in 2002 with the nearest to the star being named 55 Cancri c and the other 55 Cancri d ; a fourth planet was claimed ( its existence was later disputed ) in 2004 and named 55 Cancri e despite lying closer to the star than 55 Cancri b ; and the most recently discovered planet , in 2007 , was named 55 Cancri f despite lying between 55 Cancri c and 55 Cancri d . As of April 2012 the highest letter in use is " j " , for the unconfirmed planet HD 10180 j , and with " h " being the highest letter for a confirmed planet , belonging to the same host star ) . 
 If a planet orbits one member of a binary star system , then an uppercase letter for the star will be followed by a lowercase letter for the planet . Examples are 16 Cygni Bb and HD <unk> Bb . Planets orbiting the primary or " A " star should have ' Ab ' after the name of the system , as in HD <unk> Ab . However , the " A " is sometimes omitted ; for example the first planet discovered around the primary star of the Tau Boötis binary system is usually called simply Tau Boötis b . The star designation is necessary when more than one star in the system has its own planetary system such as in case of WASP @-@ 94 A and WASP @-@ 94 B. 
 If the parent star is a single star , then it may still be regarded as having an " A " designation , though the " A " is not normally written . The first exoplanet found to be orbiting such a star could then be regarded as a secondary <unk> that should be given the suffix " Ab " . For example , 51 Peg Aa is the host star in the system 51 Peg ; and the first exoplanet is then 51 Peg Ab . Because most exoplanets are in single @-@ star systems , the implicit " A " designation was simply dropped , leaving the exoplanet name with the lower @-@ case letter only : 51 Peg b . 
 A few exoplanets have been given names that do not conform to the above standard . For example , the planets that orbit the pulsar PSR 1257 are often referred to with capital rather than lowercase letters . Also , the underlying name of the star system itself can follow several different systems . In fact , some stars ( such as Kepler @-@ 11 ) have only received their names due to their inclusion in planet @-@ search programs , previously only being referred to by their celestial coordinates . 
 = = = <unk> planets and 2010 proposal = = = 
 Hessman et al. state that the implicit system for exoplanet names utterly failed with the discovery of circumbinary planets . They note that the discoverers of the two planets around HW Virginis tried to circumvent the naming problem by calling them " HW Vir 3 " and " HW Vir 4 " , i.e. the latter is the 4th object – stellar or planetary – discovered in the system . They also note that the discoverers of the two planets around NN Serpentis were confronted with multiple suggestions from various official sources and finally chose to use the designations " NN Ser c " and " NN Ser d " . 
 The proposal of Hessman et al. starts with the following two rules : 
 Rule 1 . The formal name of an exoplanet is obtained by appending the appropriate suffixes to the formal name of the host star or stellar system . The upper hierarchy is defined by uppercase letters , followed by lower @-@ case letters , followed by numbers , etc . The naming order within a hierarchical level is for the order of discovery only . ( This rule corresponds to the present provisional WMC naming convention . ) 
 Rule 2 . Whenever the leading capital letter designation is missing , this is interpreted as being an informal form with an implicit " A " unless otherwise explicitly stated . ( This rule corresponds to the present exoplanet community usage for planets around single stars . ) 
 They note that under these two proposed rules all of the present names for 99 % of the planets around single stars are preserved as informal forms of the IAU sanctioned provisional standard . They would rename Tau Boötis b formally as Tau Boötis Ab , retaining the prior form as an informal usage ( using Rule 2 , above ) . 
 To deal with the difficulties relating to circumbinary planets , the proposal contains two further rules : 
 Rule 3 . As an alternative to the nomenclature standard in Rule 1 , a hierarchical relationship can be expressed by <unk> the names of the higher order system and placing them in parentheses , after which the suffix for a lower order system is added . 
 Rule 4 . When in doubt ( i.e. if a different name has not been clearly set in the literature ) , the hierarchy expressed by the nomenclature should correspond to dynamically distinct ( sub ) systems in order of their dynamical relevance . The choice of hierarchical levels should be made to emphasize dynamical relationships , if known . 
 They submit that the new form using parentheses is the best for known circumbinary planets and has the desirable effect of giving these planets identical <unk> hierarchical labels and stellar component names that conform to the usage for binary stars . They say that it requires the complete renaming of only two exoplanetary systems : The planets around HW Virginis would be renamed HW Vir ( AB ) b & ( AB ) c , whereas those around NN Serpentis would be renamed NN Ser ( AB ) b & ( AB ) c . In addition the previously known single circumbinary planets around PSR B1620 @-@ 26 and DP Leonis ) can almost retain their names ( PSR B1620 @-@ 26 b and DP Leonis b ) as unofficial informal forms of the " ( AB ) b " designation where the " ( AB ) " is left out . 
 The discoverers of the circumbinary planet around Kepler @-@ 16 followed the naming scheme proposed by Hessman et al. when naming the body Kepler @-@ 16 ( AB ) <unk> , or simply Kepler @-@ <unk> when there is no ambiguity . 
 = = = Other naming systems = = = 
 Another nomenclature , often seen in science fiction , uses Roman numerals in the order of planets ' positions from the star . ( This was inspired by an old system for naming moons of the outer planets , such as " Jupiter IV " for Callisto . ) But such a system is impractical for scientific use , because new planets may be found closer to the star , changing all numerals . 
 = = Formation and evolution = = 
 Planets form within a few tens of millions of years of their star forming , and there are stars that are forming today and other stars that are ten billion years old , so unlike the planets of the Solar System , which can only be observed as they are today , studying exoplanets allows the observation of exoplanets at different stages of evolution . When planets form they have hydrogen envelopes that cool and contract over time and , depending on the mass of the planet , some or all of the hydrogen is eventually lost to space . This means that even terrestrial planets can start off with large radii . An example is Kepler @-@ <unk> which has only about twice the mass of Earth but is almost the size of Saturn which is a hundred times the mass of Earth . Kepler @-@ <unk> is quite young at a few hundred million years old . 
 = = Planet @-@ hosting stars = = 
 There is at least one planet on average per star . About 1 in 5 Sun @-@ like stars have an " Earth @-@ sized " planet in the habitable zone 
 Most known exoplanets orbit stars roughly similar to the Sun , i.e. main @-@ sequence stars of spectral categories F , G , or K. Lower @-@ mass stars ( red dwarfs , of spectral category M ) are less likely to have planets massive enough to be detected by the radial @-@ velocity method . Despite this , several tens of planets around red dwarfs have been discovered by the Kepler spacecraft , which uses the transit method to detect smaller planets . 
 Stars with a higher metallicity than the Sun are more likely to have planets , especially giant planets , than stars with lower metallicity . 
 Some planets orbit one member of a binary star system , and several circumbinary planets have been discovered which orbit around both members of binary star . A few planets in triple star systems are known and one in the quadruple system Kepler @-@ 64 . 
 = = Orbital parameters = = 
 Most known extrasolar planet candidates have been discovered using indirect methods and therefore only some of their physical and orbital parameters can be determined . For example , out of the six independent parameters that define an orbit , the radial @-@ velocity method can determine four : semi @-@ major axis , eccentricity , longitude of periastron , and time of periastron . Two parameters remain unknown : inclination and longitude of the ascending node . 
 = = = Distance from star , semi @-@ major axis and orbital period = = = 
 There are exoplanets that are much closer to their parent star than any planet in the Solar System is to the Sun , and there are also exoplanets that are much further from their star . Mercury , the closest planet to the Sun at 0 @.@ 4 astronomical units ( AU ) , takes 88 days for an orbit , but the smallest known orbits of exoplanets have orbital periods of only a few hours , e.g. Kepler @-@ 70b . The Kepler @-@ 11 system has five of its planets in smaller orbits than Mercury 's . Neptune is 30 AU from the Sun and takes 165 years to orbit it , but there are exoplanets that are thousands of AU from their star and take tens of thousands of years to orbit , e.g. GU <unk> b . 
 The orbit of a planet is not centered on the star but on their common center of mass ( see diagram on right ) . For circular orbits , the semi @-@ major axis is the distance between the planet and the center of mass of the system . For elliptical orbits , the planet – star distance varies over the course of the orbit , in which case the semi @-@ major axis is the average of the largest and smallest distances between the planet and the center of mass of the system . If the sizes of the star and planet are relatively small compared to the size of the orbit and the orbit is nearly circular and the center of mass is not too far from the star 's center , such as in the Earth – Sun system , then the distance from any point on the star to any point on the planet is approximately the same as the semi @-@ major axis . However , when a star 's radius expands when it turns into a red giant , then the distance between the planet and the star 's surface can become close to zero , or even less than zero if the planet has been engulfed by the expanding red giant , whereas the center of mass from which the semi @-@ major axis is measured will still be near the center of the red giant . 
 Orbital period is the time taken to complete one orbit . For any given star , the shorter the semi @-@ major axis of a planet , the shorter the orbital period . Also comparing planets around different stars but with the same semi @-@ major axis , the more massive the star , the shorter the orbital period . 
 Over the lifetime of a star , the semi @-@ major axes of its planets changes . This planetary migration happens especially during the formation of the planetary system when planets interact with the protoplanetary disk and each other until a relatively stable position is reached , and later in the red @-@ giant and asymptotic @-@ giant @-@ branch phases when the star expands and engulfs the nearest planets that can cause them to move inwards , and when the red giant loses mass as the outer layers dissipate causing planets to move outwards as a result of the red giant 's reduced gravitational field . 
 The radial @-@ velocity and transit methods are most sensitive to planets with small orbits . The earliest discoveries such as 51 Peg b were gas giants with orbits of a few days . These " hot Jupiters " likely formed further out and migrated inwards . The Kepler spacecraft has found planets with even shorter orbits of only a few hours , which places them within the star 's upper atmosphere or corona , and these planets are Earth @-@ sized or smaller and are probably the left @-@ over solid cores of giant planets that have evaporated due to being so close to the star , or even being engulfed by the star in its red @-@ giant phase in the case of Kepler @-@ 70b . As well as evaporation , other reasons why larger planets are unlikely to survive orbits only a few hours long include orbital decay caused by tidal force , tidal @-@ inflation instability , and Roche @-@ lobe overflow . The Roche limit implies that small planets with orbits of a few hours are likely made mostly of iron . 
 The direct imaging method is most sensitive to planets with large orbits , and has discovered some planets that have planet – star separations of hundreds of AU . However , protoplanetary disks are usually only around 100 AU in radius , and core accretion models predict giant planet formation to be within 10 AU , where the planets can coalesce quickly enough before the disk evaporates . Very @-@ long @-@ period giant planets may have been rogue planets that were captured , or formed close @-@ in and gravitationally scattered outwards , or the planet and star could be a mass @-@ imbalanced wide binary system with the planet being the primary object of its own separate protoplanetary disk . Gravitational instability models might produce planets at multi @-@ hundred AU separations but this would require unusually large disks . For planets with very wide orbits up to several hundred thousand AU it may be difficult to observationally determine whether the planet is gravitationally bound to the star . 
 Most planets that have been discovered are within a couple of AU from their host star because the most used methods ( radial @-@ velocity and transit ) require observation of several orbits to confirm that the planet exists and there has only been enough time since these methods were first used to cover small separations . Some planets with larger orbits have been discovered by direct imaging but there is a middle range of distances , roughly equivalent to the Solar System 's gas giant region , which is largely unexplored . Direct imaging equipment for exploring that region is being installed on the world 's largest telescopes and should begin operation in 2014 @.@ e.g. Gemini Planet Imager and VLT @-@ <unk> . The microlensing method has detected a few planets in the 1 – 10 AU range . It appears plausible that in most exoplanetary systems , there are one or two giant planets with orbits comparable in size to those of Jupiter and Saturn in the Solar System . Giant planets with substantially larger orbits are now known to be rare , at least around Sun @-@ like stars . 
 The distance of the habitable zone from a star depends on the type of star and this distance changes during the star 's lifetime as the size and temperature of the star changes . 
 = = = Eccentricity = = = 
 The eccentricity of an orbit is a measure of how elliptical ( elongated ) it is . All the planets of the Solar System except for Mercury have near @-@ circular orbits ( e < 0 @.@ 1 ) . Most exoplanets with orbital periods of 20 days or less have near @-@ circular orbits , i.e. very low eccentricity . That is thought to be due to tidal circularization : reduction of eccentricity over time due to gravitational interaction between two bodies . The mostly sub @-@ Neptune @-@ sized planets found by the Kepler spacecraft with short orbital periods have very circular orbits . By contrast , the giant planets with longer orbital periods discovered by radial @-@ velocity methods have quite eccentric orbits . ( As of July 2010 , 55 % of such exoplanets have eccentricities greater than 0 @.@ 2 , whereas 17 % have eccentricities greater than 0 @.@ 5 . ) Moderate to high eccentricities ( e > 0 @.@ 2 ) of giant planets are not an observational selection effect , because a planet can be detected about equally well regardless of the eccentricity of its orbit . The statistical significance of elliptical orbits in the ensemble of observed giant planets is somewhat surprising , because current theories of planetary formation suggest that low @-@ mass planets should have their orbital eccentricity circularized by gravitational interactions with the surrounding protoplanetary disk . However , as a planet grows more massive and its interaction with the disk becomes nonlinear , it may induce eccentric motion of the surrounding disk 's gas , which in turn may excite the planet 's orbital eccentricity . Low eccentricities are correlated with high multiplicity ( number of planets in the system ) based on the analysis of planets observed by the radial @-@ velocity method . 
 However , for weak Doppler signals near the limits of the current detection ability the eccentricity becomes poorly constrained and biased towards higher values . It is suggested that some of the high eccentricities reported for low @-@ mass exoplanets may be overestimates , because simulations show that many observations are also consistent with two planets on circular orbits . Reported observations of single planets in moderately eccentric orbits have about a 15 % chance of being a pair of planets . This misinterpretation is especially likely if the two planets orbit with a 2 : 1 resonance . With the exoplanet sample known in 2009 , a group of astronomers has concluded that " ( 1 ) around 35 % of the published eccentric one @-@ planet solutions are statistically indistinguishable from planetary systems in 2 : 1 orbital resonance , ( 2 ) another 40 % cannot be statistically distinguished from a circular orbital solution " and " ( 3 ) planets with masses comparable to Earth could be hidden in known orbital solutions of eccentric super @-@ Earths and Neptune mass planets " . 
 Radial velocity surveys found exoplanet orbits beyond 0 @.@ 1 AU to be eccentric , particularly for large planets . Kepler spacecraft transit data is consistent with the RV surveys and also revealed that smaller planets tend to have less eccentric orbits . 
 = = = Inclination vs. spin – orbit angle = = = 
 Orbital inclination is the angle between a planet 's orbital plane and another plane of reference . For exoplanets the inclination is usually stated with respect to an observer on Earth : the angle used is that between the normal to the planet 's orbital plane and the line of sight from Earth to the star . Therefore , most planets observed by the transit method are close to 90 degrees . Because the word ' inclination ' is used in exoplanet studies for this line @-@ of @-@ sight inclination then the angle between the planet 's orbit and the star 's rotation must use a different word and is termed the spin – orbit angle or spin – orbit alignment . In most cases the orientation of the star 's rotational axis is unknown . The Kepler spacecraft has found a few hundred multi @-@ planet systems and in most of these systems the planets all orbit in nearly the same plane , much like the Solar System . However , a combination of astrometric and radial @-@ velocity measurements has shown that some planetary systems contain planets whose orbital planes are significantly tilted relative to each other . More than half of hot Jupiters have orbital planes substantially misaligned with their parent star 's rotation . A substantial fraction of hot @-@ Jupiters even have retrograde orbits , meaning that they orbit in the opposite direction from the star 's rotation . Rather than a planet 's orbit having been disturbed , it may be that the star itself flipped early in their system 's formation due to interactions between the star 's magnetic field and the planet @-@ forming disk . 
 = = = <unk> precession = = = 
 <unk> precession is the rotation of a planet 's orbit within the orbital plane , i.e. the axes of the ellipse change direction . Various factors cause the precession . In the Solar System perturbations from other planets are the main cause , but for close @-@ in exoplanets the largest factor can be tidal forces between the star and planet . For close @-@ in exoplanets , the general relativistic contribution to the precession is also significant and can be orders of magnitude larger than the same effect for Mercury . Some exoplanets have significantly eccentric orbits , which makes it easier to detect the precession . The effect of general relativity can be detectable in timescales of roughly 10 years or less . 
 = = = Nodal precession = = = 
 Nodal precession is rotation of a planet 's orbital plane . This differs from periastron precession , which is rotation of a planet 's orbit within that plane . Nodal precession is more easily seen as distinct from periastron precession when the orbital plane is inclined to the star 's rotation , the extreme case being a polar orbit . 
 WASP @-@ 33 is a fast @-@ rotating star that hosts a hot Jupiter in an almost polar orbit . The quadrupole mass moment and the proper angular momentum of the star are 1900 and 400 times , respectively , larger than those of the Sun . This causes significant classical and relativistic deviations from Kepler 's laws . In particular , the fast rotation causes large nodal precession because of the star 's oblateness and the <unk> – Thirring effect . 
 = = Rotation and axial tilt = = 
 In April 2014 the first measurement of a planet 's rotation period was announced : the length of day for the super @-@ Jupiter gas giant Beta Pictoris b is 8 hours ( based on the assumption that the axial tilt of the planet is small . ) With an equatorial rotational velocity of 25 km per second , this is faster than for the giant planets of the Solar System , in line with the expectation that the more massive a giant planet , the faster it spins . Beta Pictoris b 's distance from its star is <unk> . At such distances the rotation of Jovian planets is not slowed by tidal effects . Beta Pictoris b is still warm and young and over the next hundreds of millions of years , it will cool down and shrink to about the size of Jupiter , and if its angular momentum is preserved then as it shrinks the length of its day will decrease to about 3 hours and its equatorial rotation velocity will speed up to about 40 km per second . The images of Beta Pictoris b do not have high enough resolution to directly see details but doppler spectroscopy techniques were used to show that different parts of the planet were moving at different speeds and in opposite directions from which it was inferred that the planet is rotating . With the next generation of large ground @-@ based telescopes it will be possible to use doppler imaging techniques to make a global map of the planet , like the recent mapping of the brown dwarf Luhman 16B . 
 = = = Origin of spin and tilt of terrestrial planets = = = 
 Giant impacts have a large effect on the spin of terrestrial planets . The last few giant impacts during planetary formation tend to be the main determiner of a terrestrial planet 's rotation rate . On average the spin angular velocity will be about 70 % of the velocity that would cause the planet to break up and fly apart ; the natural outcome of planetary embryo impacts at speeds slightly larger than escape velocity . In later stages terrestrial planet spin is also affected by impacts with planetesimals . During the giant impact stage , the thickness of a protoplanetary disk is far larger than the size of planetary embryos so collisions are equally likely to come from any direction in three @-@ dimensions . This results in the axial tilt of accreted planets ranging from 0 to 180 degrees with any direction as likely as any other with both prograde and retrograde spins equally probable . Therefore , prograde spin with a small axial tilt , common for the Solar System 's terrestrial planets except Venus , is not common in general for terrestrial planets built by giant impacts . The initial axial tilt of a planet determined by giant impacts can be substantially changed by stellar tides if the planet is close to its star and by satellite tides if the planet has a large satellite . 
 = = = Tidal effects = = = 
 For most planets the rotation period and axial tilt ( also called obliquity ) are not known , but a large number of planets have been detected with very short orbits ( where tidal effects are greater ) and will probably have reached an equilibrium rotation that can be predicted . 
 Tidal effects are the result of forces acting on a body differing from one part of the body to another . For example , the gravitational effect of a star varies with distance from one side of a planet to another . Also heat from a star creates a temperature gradient between the day and <unk> which is another source of tides . For example , on Earth , air pressure variations on the ground are affected more by temperature differences than gravitational ones . 
 Tides modify the rotation and orbit of planets until an equilibrium is reached . Whenever the rotation rate is slowed , there is an increase of the orbit semi @-@ major axis due to the conservation of angular momentum . Most of the large moons in the Solar System , including the Moon , are tidally locked to their host planet ; the same side of the moon is always facing the planet . This means the moons ' rotation periods are synchronous with their orbital period . However , when an orbit is eccentric , as is the case with many exoplanets ' orbits of their host stars , there are equilibrium states such as spin – orbit resonances that are far more likely than synchronous rotation . A spin – orbit resonance is when the rotation period and the orbital period are in an integer ratio – this is called a <unk> . Non @-@ resonant equilibria such as the retrograde rotation of Venus can also occur when both gravitational and thermal atmospheric tides are both significant . 
 A synchronous tidal lock is not necessarily particularly slow – there are planets with orbits that take only a few hours . 
 Gravitational tides tend to reduce the axial tilt to zero but over a longer timescale than the rotation rate reaches equilibrium . However , the presence of multiple planets in a system can cause axial tilt to be captured in a resonance called a Cassini state . There are small oscillations around this state and in the case of Mars these axial tilt variations are chaotic . 
 Hot Jupiters ' close proximity to their host star means that their spin – orbit evolution is mostly due to the star 's gravity and not the other effects . Hot Jupiters rotation rate is not thought to be captured into spin – orbit resonance due to way fluid @-@ body reacts to tides , and therefore slows down to synchronous rotation if it is on a circular orbit or slows to a non @-@ synchronous rotation if on an eccentric orbit . Hot Jupiters are likely to evolve towards zero axial tilt even if they had been in a Cassini state during planetary migration when they were further from their star . Hot Jupiters ' orbits will become more circular over time , however the presence of other planets in the system on eccentric orbits , even ones as small as Earth and as far away as the habitable zone , can continue to maintain the eccentricity of the Hot Jupiter so that the length of time for tidal circularization can be billions instead of millions of years . 
 The rotation rate of planet HD <unk> b is predicted to be about 1 @.@ 9 days . HD <unk> b avoids spin – orbit resonance because it is a gas giant . The eccentricity of its orbit means that it avoids becoming tidally locked . 
 = = Physical parameters = = 
 = = = Mass = = = 
 When a planet is found by the radial @-@ velocity method , its orbital inclination i is unknown and can range from 0 to 90 degrees . The method is unable to determine the true mass ( M ) of the planet , but rather gives a lower limit for its mass , M sini . In a few cases an apparent exoplanet may be a more massive object such as a brown dwarf or red dwarf . However , the probability of a small value of i ( say less than 30 degrees , which would give a true mass at least double the observed lower limit ) is relatively low ( 1 − ( √ 3 ) / 2 ≈ 13 % ) and hence most planets will have true masses fairly close to the observed lower limit . 
 If a planet 's orbit is nearly perpendicular to the line of vision ( i.e. i close to 90 ° ) , a planet can be detected through the transit method . The inclination will then be known , and the inclination combined with M sini from radial @-@ velocity observations will give the planet 's true mass . 
 Also , astrometric observations and dynamical considerations in multiple @-@ planet systems can sometimes provide an upper limit to the planet 's true mass . 
 The mass of a transiting exoplanet can also be determined from the transmission spectrum of its atmosphere , as it can be used to constrain independently the atmospheric composition , temperature , pressure , and scale height . 
 Transit @-@ timing variation can also be used to find planets ' masses . 
 = = = Radius , density and bulk composition = = = 
 Prior to recent results from the Kepler spacecraft most confirmed planets were gas giants comparable in size to Jupiter or larger because they are most easily detected . However , the planets detected by Kepler are mostly between the size of Neptune and the size of Earth . 
 If a planet is detectable by both the radial @-@ velocity and the transit methods , then both its true mass and its radius can be found . The planet 's density can then be calculated . Planets with low density are inferred to be composed mainly of hydrogen and helium , whereas planets of intermediate density are inferred to have water as a major constituent . A planet of high density is inferred to be rocky , like Earth and the other terrestrial planets of the Solar System . 
 = = = = Gas giants , puffy planets , and super @-@ Jupiters = = = = 
 Gaseous planets that are hot because they are close to their star or because they are still hot from their formation are expanded by the heat . For colder gas planets there is a maximum radius which is slightly larger than Jupiter which occurs when the mass reaches a few Jupiter @-@ masses . Adding mass beyond this point causes the radius to shrink . 
 Even when taking heating from the star into account , many transiting exoplanets are much larger than expected given their mass , meaning that they have surprisingly low density . See the magnetic field section for one possible explanation . 
 Besides those inflated hot Jupiters there is another type of low @-@ density planet : occurring at around 0 @.@ 6 times the size of Jupiter where there are very few planets . The planets around Kepler @-@ 51 are far less dense ( far more diffuse ) than the inflated hot Jupiters as can be seen in the plots on the right where the three Kepler @-@ 51 planets stand out in the <unk> vs. radius plot . A more detailed study taking into account star spots may modify these results to produce less extreme values . 
 = = = = Ice giants and super @-@ Neptunes = = = = 
 Kepler @-@ <unk> is the first super @-@ Neptune discovered . It has three times Neptune 's mass but its density suggests that heavy elements make up more than 60 % of its total mass , unlike hydrogen – helium @-@ dominated gas giants . 
 = = = = Super @-@ Earths , mini @-@ Neptunes , and gas dwarfs = = = = 
 If a planet has a radius and / or mass between that of Earth and Neptune then there is a question about whether the planet is rocky like Earth , a mixture of volatiles and gas like Neptune , a small planet with a hydrogen / helium envelope ( mini @-@ Jupiter ) , or of some other composition . 
 Some of the Kepler transiting planets with radii in the range 1 – 4 Earth radii have had their masses measured by radial @-@ velocity or transit @-@ timing methods . The calculated densities show that up to 1 @.@ 5 Earth radii , these planets are rocky and that density increases with increasing radius due to gravitational compression . However , between 1 @.@ 5 and 4 Earth radii the density decreases with increasing radius . This indicates that above 1 @.@ 5 Earth radii planets tend to have increasing amounts of volatiles and gas . Despite this general trend there is a wide range of masses at a given radius , which could be because gas planets can have rocky cores of different masses or compositions and could also be due to photoevaporation of volatiles . Thermal evolutionary atmosphere models suggest a radius of 1 @.@ 75 times that of Earth as a dividing line between rocky and gaseous planets . Excluding close @-@ in planets that have lost their gas envelope due to stellar irradiation , studies of the metallicity of stars suggest a dividing line of 1 @.@ 7 Earth radii between rocky planets and gas dwarfs ; then another dividing line at 3 @.@ 9 Earth radii between gas dwarfs and gas giants . These dividing lines are statistical trends and do not necessarily apply to specific planets because there are many other factors besides metallicity that affect planet formation , including distance from star – there may be larger rocky planets formed at larger distances . An independent reanalysis of the data suggests that there are no such dividing lines and that there is a continuum of planet formation between 1 and 4 Earth radii and no reason to expect that the amount of solid material in a protoplanetary disk determines whether super @-@ Earths or mini @-@ Neptunes form . Studies made in 2016 based on over 300 planets suggest that most objects over approximately two Earth masses collect significant hydrogen – helium envelopes , which would mean rocky super @-@ Earths may be rare . 
 The discovery of the low @-@ density Earth @-@ mass planet Kepler @-@ <unk> shows that there is an overlapping range of masses in which both rocky planets and low @-@ density planets occur . Low @-@ mass low @-@ density planets could be ocean planets or super @-@ Earths with a remnant hydrogen atmosphere , or hot planets with a steam atmosphere , or mini @-@ Neptunes with a hydrogen – helium atmosphere . Other possibilities for low @-@ mass low @-@ density planets are large atmospheres of carbon monoxide , carbon dioxide , methane , or nitrogen . 
 = = = = Massive solid planets and giant planets with massive cores = = = = 
 In 2014 , new measurements of Kepler @-@ 10c found that it is a Neptune @-@ mass planet ( 17 Earth masses ) with a density higher than Earth 's , indicating that Kepler @-@ 10c is composed mostly of rock with possibly up to 20 % high @-@ pressure water ice but without a hydrogen @-@ dominated envelope . Because this is well above the 10 @-@ Earth @-@ mass upper limit that is commonly used for the term ' super @-@ Earth ' , the term mega @-@ Earth has been coined . A similarly massive and dense planet could be Kepler @-@ <unk> , although its density is not as well measured as that of Kepler 10c . The next most massive known solid planets are half this mass : 55 Cancri e and Kepler @-@ <unk> . 
 Gas planets can also have large solid cores : the Saturn @-@ mass planet HD <unk> b has only two @-@ thirds of Saturn 's radius , so it may have a rock – ice core of 60 Earth masses or more . Corot @-@ <unk> has 4 @.@ 24 times Jupiter 's mass but a radius of only 0 @.@ 84 that of Jupiter — it may have a metal core of 800 Earth masses if the heavy elements are concentrated in the core or a core of 300 Earth masses if the heavy elements are more distributed throughout the planet . 
 Transit @-@ timing variation measurements indicate that Kepler @-@ <unk> , Kepler @-@ <unk> and Kepler @-@ <unk> have maximum masses between 30 and 100 times that of Earth , although the actual masses could be much lower . With radii about 2 Earth radii in size , they might have densities larger than that of an iron planet of the same size . They orbit very close to their stars , so they could be the remnant cores ( chthonian planets ) of evaporated gas giants or brown dwarfs . If cores are massive enough they could remain compressed for billions of years despite losing the atmospheric mass . 
 Solid planets up to thousands of Earth masses may be able to form around massive stars ( B @-@ type and O @-@ type stars ; 5 – 120 solar masses ) , where the protoplanetary disk would contain enough heavy elements . Also , these stars have high UV radiation and winds that could <unk> the gas in the disk , leaving just the heavy elements . For comparison , Neptune 's mass equals 17 Earth masses , Jupiter has 318 Earth masses , and the 13 Jupiter @-@ mass limit used in the IAU 's working definition of an exoplanet equals approximately 4000 Earth masses . 
 Another way of forming massive solid planets is when a white dwarf in a close binary system loses material to a companion neutron star . The white dwarf can be reduced to planetary @-@ mass , leaving just its crystallised carbon – oxygen core . A likely example of this is PSR J1719 @-@ 1438 b . 
 Cold planets have a maximum radius because adding more mass at that point causes the planet to compress under the weight instead of increasing the radius . The maximum radius for solid planets is lower than the maximum radius for gas planets . 
 = = = Shape = = = 
 When the size of a planet is described using its radius this is approximating the shape by a sphere . However , the rotation of a planet causes it to be flattened at the poles so that the equatorial radius is larger than the polar radius , making it closer to an oblate spheroid . The oblateness of transiting exoplanets will affect the transit light curves . At the limits of current technology it has been possible to show that HD 189733b is less oblate than Saturn . If the planet is close to its star , then gravitational tides will elongate the planet in the direction of the star , so that the planet will be closer to a triaxial ellipsoid . Because tidal deformation is along a line between the planet and the star , it is difficult to detect from transit photometry — it will have an order of magnitude less effect on the transit light curves than that caused by rotational deformation even in cases where the tidal deformation is larger than rotational deformation ( such as is the case for tidally locked hot Jupiters ) . Material rigidity of rocky planets and rocky cores of gas planets will cause further deviations from the aforementioned shapes . Thermal tides caused by unevenly irradiated surfaces are another factor . 
 = = Atmosphere = = 
 As of February 2014 , more than fifty transiting and five directly imaged exoplanet atmospheres have been observed , resulting in detection of molecular spectral features ; observation of day – night temperature gradients ; and constraints on vertical atmospheric structure . Also , an atmosphere has been detected on the non @-@ transiting hot Jupiter Tau Boötis b . 
 Spectroscopic measurements can be used to study a transiting planet 's atmospheric composition , temperature , pressure , and scale height , and hence can be used to determine its mass . 
 Stellar light is polarized by atmospheric molecules ; this could be detected with a polarimeter . HD 189733 b has been studied by <unk> . 
 Extrasolar planets have phases similar to the phases of the Moon . By observing the exact variation of brightness with phase , astronomers can calculate atmospheric @-@ particle sizes . 
 = = Surface = = 
 = = = Surface composition = = = 
 Surface features can be distinguished from atmospheric features by comparing emission and reflection spectroscopy with transmission spectroscopy . Mid @-@ infrared spectroscopy of exoplanets may detect rocky surfaces , and near @-@ infrared may identify magma oceans or high @-@ temperature lavas , hydrated silicate surfaces and water ice , giving an unambiguous method to distinguish between rocky and gaseous exoplanets . 
 = = = Surface temperature = = = 
 One can estimate the temperature of an exoplanet based on the intensity of the light it receives from its parent star . For example , the planet <unk> @-@ 2005 @-@ BLG @-@ <unk> is estimated to have a surface temperature of roughly − 220 ° C ( 50 K ) . However , such estimates may be substantially in error because they depend on the planet 's usually unknown albedo , and because factors such as the greenhouse effect may introduce unknown complications . A few planets have had their temperature measured by observing the variation in infrared radiation as the planet moves around in its orbit and is eclipsed by its parent star . For example , the planet HD 189733b has been found to have an average temperature of 1205 ± 9 K ( 932 ± 9 ° C ) on its dayside and 973 ± 33 K ( 700 ± 33 ° C ) on its nightside . 
 = = General features = = 
 = = = Color and brightness = = = 
 In 2013 the color of an exoplanet was found for the first time . The best @-@ fit albedo measurements of HD 189733b suggest that it is deep dark blue . 
 Visually , GJ 504 b would have a magenta color . 
 Kappa Andromedae b if seen up close , would appear reddish in color . 
 The apparent brightness ( apparent magnitude ) of a planet depends on how far away the observer is , how reflective the planet is ( albedo ) , and how much light the planet receives from its star , which depends on how far the planet is from the star and how bright the star is . So , a planet with a low albedo that is close to its star can appear brighter than a planet with high albedo that is far from the star . 
 The darkest known planet in terms of geometric albedo is TrES @-@ 2b , a hot Jupiter that reflects less than 1 % of the light from its star , making it less reflective than coal or black acrylic paint . Hot Jupiters are expected to be quite dark due to sodium and potassium in their atmospheres but it is not known why TrES @-@ 2b is so dark — it could be due to an unknown chemical . 
 For gas giants , geometric albedo generally decreases with increasing metallicity or atmospheric temperature unless there are clouds to modify this effect . Increased cloud @-@ column depth increases the albedo at optical wavelengths , but decreases it at some infrared wavelengths . Optical albedo increases with age , because older planets have higher cloud @-@ column depths . Optical albedo decreases with increasing mass , because higher @-@ mass giant planets have higher surface <unk> , which produces lower cloud @-@ column depths . Also , elliptical orbits can cause major fluctuations in atmospheric composition , which can have a significant effect . 
 There is more thermal emission than reflection at some near @-@ infrared wavelengths for massive and / or young gas giants . So , although optical brightness is fully phase @-@ dependent , this is not always the case in the near infrared . 
 Temperatures of gas giants reduce over time and with distance from their star . Lowering the temperature increases optical albedo even without clouds . At a sufficiently low temperature , water clouds form , which further increase optical albedo . At even lower temperatures ammonia clouds form , resulting in the highest albedos at most optical and near @-@ infrared wavelengths . 
 = = = Magnetic field = = = 
 In 2014 , a magnetic field around HD 209458 b was inferred from the way hydrogen was evaporating from the planet . It is the first ( indirect ) detection of a magnetic field on an exoplanet . The magnetic field is estimated to be about one tenth as strong as Jupiter 's . 
 Interaction between a close @-@ in planet 's magnetic field and a star can produce spots on the star in a similar way to how the Galilean moons produce aurorae on Jupiter . Auroral radio emissions could be detected with radio telescopes such as <unk> . The radio emissions could enable determination of the rotation rate of a planet which is difficult to detect otherwise . 
 Earth 's magnetic field results from its flowing liquid metallic core , but in super @-@ Earths the mass can produce high pressures with large <unk> and high melting temperatures which could prevent the interiors from separating into different layers and so result in undifferentiated <unk> mantles . Magnesium oxide , which is rocky on Earth , can be a liquid metal at the pressures and temperatures found in super @-@ Earths and could generate a magnetic field in the mantles of super @-@ Earths . 
 Hot Jupiters have been observed to have a larger radius than expected . This could be caused by the interaction between the stellar wind and the planet 's magnetosphere creating an electric current through the planet that heats it up causing it to expand . The more magnetically active a star is the greater the stellar wind and the larger the electric current leading to more heating and expansion of the planet . This theory matches the observation that stellar activity is correlated with inflated planetary radii . 
 = = = Plate tectonics = = = 
 In 2007 two independent teams of researchers came to opposing conclusions about the likelihood of plate tectonics on larger super @-@ Earths with one team saying that plate tectonics would be episodic or stagnant and the other team saying that plate tectonics is very likely on super @-@ Earths even if the planet is dry . 
 If super @-@ Earths have more than 80 times as much water as Earth then they become ocean planets with all land completely submerged . However , if there is less water than this limit , then the deep water cycle will move enough water between the oceans and mantle to allow continents to exist . 
 = = = Volcanism = = = 
 Large surface temperature variations on 55 Cancri e have been attributed to possible volcanic activity releasing large clouds of dust which blanket the planet and block thermal emissions . 
 = = = Rings = = = 
 The star <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> @.@ 6 is orbited by an object that is circled by a ring system much larger than Saturn 's rings . However , the mass of the object is not known ; it could be a brown dwarf or low @-@ mass star instead of a planet . 
 The brightness of optical images of Fomalhaut b could be due to starlight reflecting off a <unk> ring system with a radius between 20 to 40 times that of Jupiter 's radius , about the size of the orbits of the Galilean moons . 
 The rings of the Solar System 's gas giants are aligned with their planet 's equator . However , for exoplanets that orbit close to their star , tidal forces from the star would lead to the outermost rings of a planet being aligned with the planet 's orbital plane around the star . A planet 's innermost rings would still be aligned with the planet 's equator so that if the planet has a tilted rotational axis , then the different alignments between the inner and outer rings would create a warped ring system . 
 = = = Moons = = = 
 In December 2013 a candidate <unk> of a rogue planet was announced . No <unk> have been confirmed so far . 
 = = = Comet @-@ like tails = = = 
 KIC <unk> b is a small rocky planet , very close to its star , that is evaporating and leaving a trailing tail of cloud and dust like a comet . The dust could be ash erupting from volcanos and escaping due to the small planet 's low surface @-@ gravity , or it could be from metals that are vaporized by the high temperatures of being so close to the star with the metal vapor then condensing into dust . 
 In June 2015 , scientists reported that the atmosphere of GJ 436 b was evaporating , resulting in a giant cloud around the planet and , due to radiation from the host star , a long trailing tail 14 × 10 ^ 6 km ( 9 × 10 ^ 6 mi ) long . 
 = = = <unk> pattern = = = 
 <unk> locked planets in a 1 : 1 spin – orbit resonance would have their star always shining directly overhead on one spot which would be hot with the opposite hemisphere receiving no light and being freezing cold . Such a planet could resemble an eyeball with the hotspot being the pupil . Planets with an eccentric orbit could be locked in other resonances . 3 : 2 and 5 : 2 resonances would result in a double @-@ eyeball pattern with hotspots in both eastern and western hemispheres . Planets with both an eccentric orbit and a tilted axis of rotation would have more complicated insolation patterns . 
 = = Habitability = = 
 = = = Habitable zone = = = 
 The habitable zone around a star is the region where the temperature is just right to allow liquid water to exist on a planet ; that is , not too close to the star for the water to evaporate and not too far away from the star for the water to freeze . The heat produced by stars varies depending on the size and age of the star so that the habitable zone can be at different distances . Also , the atmospheric conditions on the planet influence the planet 's ability to retain heat so that the location of the habitable zone is also specific to each type of planet : desert planets ( also known as dry planets ) , with very little water , will have less water vapor in the atmosphere than Earth and so have a reduced greenhouse effect , meaning that a desert planet could maintain oases of water closer to its star than Earth is to the Sun . The lack of water also means there is less ice to reflect heat into space , so the outer edge of desert @-@ planet habitable zones is further out . Rocky planets with a thick hydrogen atmosphere could maintain surface water much further out than the Earth – Sun distance . Planets with larger mass have wider habitable zones because the gravity reduces the water cloud column depth which reduces the greenhouse effect of water vapor thus moving the inner edge of the habitable zone closer to the star . 
 Planetary rotation rate is one of the major factors determining the circulation of the atmosphere and hence the pattern of clouds : slowly rotating planets create thick clouds that reflect more and so can be habitable much closer to their star . Earth with its current atmosphere would be habitable in Venus 's orbit , if it had Venus 's slow rotation . Venus is <unk> : if Venus lost its water ocean due to a runaway greenhouse effect , it is likely to have had a higher rotation rate in the past ; alternatively Venus never had an ocean because water vapor was lost to space during its formation and could have had its slow rotation throughout its history . 
 <unk> locked planets ( a.k.a. " eyeball " planets ) can be habitable closer to their star than previously thought due to the effect of clouds : at high stellar flux , strong convection produces thick water clouds near the substellar point that greatly increase the planetary albedo and reduce surface temperatures . 
 Habitable zones have usually been defined in terms of surface temperature , however over half of Earth 's biomass is from subsurface microbes , and the temperature increases as you go deeper underground , so the subsurface can be conducive for life when the surface is frozen and if this is considered , the habitable zone extends much further from the star , even rogue planets could have liquid water at sufficient depths underground . In an earlier era of the universe the temperature of the cosmic microwave background would have allowed any rocky planets that existed to have liquid water on their surface regardless of their distance from a star . Jupiter @-@ like planets might not be habitable , but they could have habitable moons . 
 = = = Ice ages and snowball states = = = 
 The outer edge of the habitable zone is where planets will be completely frozen but even planets well inside the habitable zone can periodically become frozen . If orbital fluctuations or other causes produce cooling then this creates more ice but ice reflects sunlight causing even more cooling creating a feedback loop until the planet is completely or nearly completely frozen . When the surface is frozen this stops carbon dioxide weathering resulting in a build @-@ up of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere from volcanic emissions . This creates a greenhouse effect which <unk> the planet again . Planets with a large axial tilt are less likely to enter snowball states and can retain liquid water further from their star . Large fluctuations of axial tilt can have even more of a warming effect than a fixed large tilt . Paradoxically planets around cooler stars , such as red dwarfs , are less likely to enter snowball states because the infrared radiation emitted by cooler stars is mostly at wavelengths that are absorbed by ice which heats it up . 
 = = = Tidal heating = = = 
 If a planet has an eccentric orbit then tidal heating can provide another source of energy besides stellar irradiation . This means that eccentric planets in the radiative habitable zone can be too hot for liquid water ( Tidal Venus ) . Tides also circularize orbits over time so there could be planets in the habitable zone with circular orbits that have no water because they used to have eccentric orbits . Eccentric planets further out than the radiative habitable zone would still have frozen surfaces but the tidal heating could create a subsurface ocean similar to Europa 's . In some planetary systems , such as in the Upsilon Andromedae system , the eccentricity of orbits is maintained or even periodically varied by perturbations from other planets in the system . Tidal heating can cause outgassing from the mantle , contributing to the formation and replenishment of an atmosphere . 
 = = = Potentially habitable planets = = = 
 A review in 2015 came to the conclusion that the exoplanets Kepler @-@ <unk> , Kepler @-@ 186f and Kepler @-@ <unk> were likely the best candidates for being potentially habitable . These are at a distance of 1200 , 490 and 1 @,@ 120 light @-@ years away , respectively . Of these , Kepler @-@ 186f is in similar size to Earth with its 1 @.@ 2 @-@ Earth @-@ radius measure , and it is located towards the outer edge of the habitable zone around its red dwarf sun . 
 When looking at the nearest terrestrial exoplanet candidates , Tau Ceti e is merely 11 @.@ 9 light @-@ years away . Its average surface temperature is estimated to be 68 ° C ( 341 K ) . 
 = = = = Earth @-@ size planets = = = = 
 In November 2013 it was announced that 22 ± 8 % of Sun @-@ like stars have an Earth @-@ sized planet in the habitable zone . Assuming 200 billion stars in the Milky Way , that would be 11 billion potentially habitable Earths , rising to 40 billion if red dwarfs are included . 
 Kepler @-@ 186f , a 1 @.@ 2 @-@ Earth @-@ radius planet in the habitable zone of a red dwarf , announced in April 2014 . 
 In February 2013 , researchers calculated that up to 6 % of small red dwarfs may have planets with Earth @-@ like properties . This suggests that the closest " alien Earth " to the Solar System could be 13 light @-@ years away . The estimated distance increases to 21 light @-@ years when a 95 percent confidence interval is used . In March 2013 a revised estimate based on a more accurate consideration of the size of the habitable zone around red dwarfs gave an occurrence rate of 50 % for Earth @-@ size planets in the habitable zone of red dwarfs . 
 At 1 @.@ 63 times Earth 's radius Kepler @-@ <unk> is the first discovered near @-@ Earth @-@ size planet in the “ habitable zone ” around a G2 @-@ type Sun @-@ like star ( 23 July 2015 ) . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 On 9 May 2013 , a congressional hearing by two United States House of Representatives subcommittees discussed " Exoplanet Discoveries : Have We Found Other Earths ? " , prompted by the discovery of exoplanet Kepler @-@ <unk> , along with Kepler @-@ <unk> and Kepler @-@ <unk> . A related special issue of the journal Science , published earlier , described the discovery of the exoplanets . 
 = = = Formation and evolution = = = 
 John Lee Grenfell ; <unk> , Heike ; <unk> , Franck ; Kaltenegger , Lisa ; <unk> , Charles ; <unk> , William ; <unk> , Carlos ; <unk> , Malcolm ; Henning , Thomas ; Herbst , Tom ; <unk> , Helmut ; Léger , Alain ; <unk> , René ; Lunine , Jonathan ; <unk> , Francesco ; Penny , Alan ; <unk> , Andreas ; <unk> , Huub ; Schneider , Jean ; Stam , Daphne ; <unk> , Giovanna ; White , Glenn J. ( 2010 ) . " Co @-@ evolution of atmospheres , life , and climate " . Astrobiology 10 ( 1 ) : 77 – 88 @.@ arXiv : 1005 @.@ <unk> . Bibcode : <unk> .. 10 ... <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1089 / <unk> PMID <unk> . 
 Fortney , Jonathan J. ; Hubbard , William B. ( 2003 ) . " Phase Separation in Giant Planets : <unk> Evolution of Saturn " . Icarus 164 ( 2003 ) : 228 – 243 @.@ arXiv : astro @-@ ph / <unk> . Bibcode : <unk> .. 164 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1016 / <unk> @-@ 1035 ( 03 ) <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Joost van <unk> ; <unk> , Eric ; Conrad , Clinton P. ( 2013 ) . " <unk> <unk> for Rocky , Earth @-@ Mass Exoplanets with Contrasting Mantle Convection Regimes " . arXiv : 1304 @.@ <unk> [ astro @-@ ph.EP ] . 
 Baraffe , I. ; <unk> , F. ; Chabrier , G. ; Barman , T. S. ; Allard , F. ; <unk> , P. H. ; <unk> , H. ( 2004 ) . " The effect of evaporation on the evolution of close @-@ in giant planets " . Astronomy and Astrophysics 419 ( 2 ) : <unk> arXiv : astro @-@ ph / <unk> . Bibcode : <unk> & A ... <unk> .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1051 / 0004 @-@ <unk> : <unk> . 
 Jackson , Brian ; Barnes , Rory ; Greenberg , Richard ( 2009 ) . " Observational Evidence for Tidal Destruction of Exoplanets " . The Astrophysical Journal 698 ( 2 ) : 1357 – 1366 @.@ arXiv : <unk> @.@ 1170 . Bibcode : <unk> ... <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1088 / 0004 @-@ 637X / 698 / 2 / 1357 . 
 Adams , Fred C. ; Laughlin , Gregory ( 1997 ) . " A Dying Universe : The Long Term Fate and Evolution of Astrophysical Objects " . Reviews of Modern Physics 69 ( 2 ) : 337 – 372 @.@ arXiv : astro @-@ ph / <unk> . Bibcode : <unk> ... 69 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1103 / <unk> 
 = = = Volcanism = = = 
 Kaltenegger , L. ; Henning , W. G. ; <unk> , D. D. ( 2010 ) . " Detecting Volcanism on Extrasolar Planets " . The Astronomical Journal 140 ( 5 ) : 1370 – 1380 @.@ arXiv : 1009 @.@ 1355 . Bibcode : <unk> .... <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1088 / 0004 @-@ <unk> / 140 / 5 / 1370 . 
 Kaltenegger , L. ; <unk> , D. ( 2009 ) . " Detecting planetary geochemical cycles on exoplanets : Atmospheric signatures and the case of SO2 " . The Astrophysical Journal 708 ( 2 ) : 1162 – 1167 @.@ arXiv : <unk> @.@ 2193 . Bibcode : <unk> ... <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1088 / 0004 @-@ 637X / 708 / 2 / 1162 . 
 Kite , Edwin S. ; Manga , Michael ; <unk> , Eric ( 2008 ) . " <unk> and Rate of Volcanism on Massive Earth @-@ like Planets " . The Astrophysical Journal 700 ( 2 ) : 1732 – 1749 @.@ arXiv : <unk> @.@ 2305 . Bibcode : <unk> ... <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1088 / 0004 @-@ 637X / 700 / 2 / 1732 . 
 Jackson , Brian ; Barnes , Rory ; Greenberg , Richard ( 2008 ) . " Tidal Heating of Terrestrial Extra @-@ Solar Planets and Implications for their Habitability " . Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 391 : 237 – 245 @.@ arXiv : <unk> @.@ 2770 . Bibcode : <unk> .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / <unk> @-@ <unk> 
 = = = Interior structure = = = 
 Baraffe , I. ; Chabrier , G. ; Fortney , J. ; <unk> , C. ( 2014 ) . " Planetary Internal Structures " . Protostars and Planets <unk> arXiv : 1401 @.@ <unk> [ astro @-@ ph.EP ] . doi : 10 @.@ <unk> / azu _ <unk> _ <unk> @-@ <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 = = = Surface mapping = = = 
 <unk> , Hajime ; Fujii , Yuka ( 2010 ) . " Global Mapping of Earth @-@ like Exoplanets from Scattered Light Curves " . The Astrophysical Journal 720 ( 2 ) : 1333 – 1350 @.@ arXiv : 1004 @.@ <unk> . Bibcode : <unk> ... <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1088 / 0004 @-@ 637X / 720 / 2 / 1333 . 
 <unk> , C. ; <unk> , E. ; Cowan , N. ( 2012 ) . " A Two @-@ Dimensional Infrared Map of the Extrasolar Planet HD 189733b " . The Astrophysical Journal 747 ( 2 ) : <unk> arXiv : 1202 @.@ 1883 . Bibcode : 2012ApJ ... <unk> .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1088 / 2041 @-@ <unk> / 747 / 2 / L20 . 
 = = = Climate and weather = = = 
 Patterns of Sunlight on Extra @-@ Solar Planets , Tony <unk> , 18 March 2014 
 Forget , Francois ; Leconte , Jeremy ( 2013 ) . " Possible climates on terrestrial exoplanets " . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A : Mathematical , Physical and Engineering Sciences 372 ( 2014 ) : <unk> @.@ arXiv : 1311 @.@ <unk> . Bibcode : <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1098 / <unk> 
 Abbot , Dorian S. ; Cowan , Nicolas B. ; <unk> , Fred J. ( 2012 ) . " Indication of insensitivity of planetary weathering behavior and habitable zone to surface land fraction " . The Astrophysical Journal 756 ( 2 ) : 178 @.@ arXiv : 1208 @.@ 1760 . Bibcode : 2012ApJ ... 756 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1088 / 0004 @-@ 637X / 756 / 2 / 178 . 
 Showman , Adam P. ; Cho , James Y @-@ K. ; Menou , Kristen ( 2009 ) . " Atmospheric Circulation of Exoplanets " . arXiv : <unk> @.@ <unk> [ astro @-@ ph.EP ] . 
 New Technique Could Measure Exoplanet Atmospheric Pressure , an Indicator of Habitability , Shannon Hall on 6 March 2014 , <unk> 
 = = = Water = = = 
 After hydrogen and helium , oxygen is the most common element in many planetary systems ( in some systems carbon is more common than oxygen ) , and water H2O one of the most common compounds . Gas giants are composed mostly of hydrogen and helium , but most planets are between the size of Earth and Neptune , where many planets will have deep water oceans covering the entire surface in addition to a hydrogen – helium envelope . 
 van <unk> , <unk> F. ; Bergin , Edwin A. ; Lis , Dariusz C. ; Lunine , Jonathan I. ( 2014 ) . " Water : From Clouds to Planets " . Protostars and Planets <unk> arXiv : 1401 @.@ <unk> [ astro @-@ <unk> ] . doi : 10 @.@ <unk> / azu _ <unk> _ <unk> @-@ <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Are Exoplanets Orbiting Red Dwarf Stars too Dry for Life ? , Michael <unk> , Astrobiology Magazine , 27 August 2013 
 Carbon @-@ Rich Exoplanets May Lack Surface Water , 26 October 2013 
 <unk> @-@ Trapped ' Worlds , Adam Hadhazy , Astrobiology Magazine , 18 July 2013 
 Lobster @-@ Shaped Extrasolar Oceans , 10 March 2014 , Charles Q. Choi , Astrobiology Magazine 
 Alien Moons Could Bake Dry from Young Gas Giants ' Hot Glow , Adam Hadhazy , Astrobiology Magazine 25 March 2014 
 Bullock , Mark Alan ; Grinspoon , D. H. ( 2012 ) . " The Longevity of Oceans on Terrestrial Exoplanets " . American Astronomical Society 44 : 208 @.@ 06 . Bibcode : <unk> .... <unk> . 
 Cowan , Nicolas B. ; Abbot , Dorian S. ; Voigt , Aiko ( 2012 ) . " A False Positive for Ocean <unk> on Exoplanets : The Latitude @-@ Albedo Effect " . The Astrophysical Journal 752 : <unk> arXiv : 1205 @.@ 1058 . Bibcode : 2012ApJ ... <unk> ... <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1088 / 2041 @-@ <unk> / 752 / 1 / L3 . 
 = = = Orbital dynamics = = = 
 = = = = Eccentricity dynamics = = = = 
 Takeda , G. ; <unk> , F. A. ( 2005 ) . " High Orbital <unk> of Extrasolar Planets Induced by the Kozai Mechanism " . The Astrophysical Journal 627 ( 2 ) : 1001 – 1010 @.@ arXiv : astro @-@ ph / <unk> . Bibcode : <unk> ... <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1086 / <unk> . 
 Spiegel , David S. ( 2010 ) . " Extreme Climate Variations from Milankovitch @-@ like Eccentricity Oscillations in Extrasolar Planetary Systems " . arXiv : 1010 @.@ 2197 [ astro @-@ ph.EP ] . 
 Kane , Stephen R. ; Raymond , Sean N. ( 2014 ) . " Orbital Dynamics of Multi @-@ Planet Systems with Eccentricity Diversity " . The Astrophysical Journal 784 ( 2 ) : 104 @.@ arXiv : 1401 @.@ <unk> . Bibcode : <unk> ... 784 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1088 / 0004 @-@ 637X / 784 / 2 / 104 . 
 Moorhead , Althea V. ; Ford , Eric B. ( 2009 ) . " Type II migration of planets on eccentric orbits " . arXiv : <unk> @.@ <unk> [ astro @-@ ph.EP ] . 
 D 'Angelo , Gennaro ; Lubow , Stephen H. ; Bate , Matthew R. ( 2006 ) . " Evolution of Giant Planets in Eccentric Disks " . The Astrophysical Journal 652 ( 2 ) : 1698 – 1714 @.@ arXiv : astro @-@ ph / <unk> . Bibcode : <unk> ... <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1086 / <unk> . 
 = = = = Inclination dynamics = = = = 
 Dawson , Rebekah ; Chiang , Eugene ( 2014 ) . " A Class of Warm Jupiters with Mutually Inclined , <unk> <unk> , Close Friends " . Science 346 ( <unk> ) : 212 – 6 @.@ arXiv : 1410 @.@ <unk> . Bibcode : <unk> ... 346 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1126 / <unk> PMID <unk> . 
 = Aikido = 
 Aikido ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> ) [ <unk> ] is a modern Japanese martial art developed by Morihei Ueshiba as a synthesis of his martial studies , philosophy , and religious beliefs . Aikido is often translated as " the way of unifying ( with ) life energy " or as " the way of harmonious spirit . " Ueshiba 's goal was to create an art that practitioners could use to defend themselves while also protecting their attacker from injury . 
 Aikido techniques consist of entering and turning movements that redirect the momentum of an opponent 's attack , and a throw or joint lock that terminates the technique . 
 Aikido derives mainly from the martial art of Daitō @-@ ryū Aiki @-@ jūjutsu , but began to diverge from it in the late 1920s , partly due to Ueshiba 's involvement with the Ōmoto @-@ kyō religion . Ueshiba 's early students ' documents bear the term aiki @-@ jūjutsu . 
 Ueshiba 's senior students have different approaches to aikido , depending partly on when they studied with him . Today aikido is found all over the world in a number of styles , with broad ranges of interpretation and emphasis . However , they all share techniques formulated by Ueshiba and most have concern for the well @-@ being of the attacker . 
 = = Etymology and basic philosophy = = 
 The word " aikido " is formed of three kanji : 
 <unk> – ai – joining , unifying , combining , fitting 
 気 – ki – spirit , energy , mood , morale 
 道 – dō – way , path 
 The term " aiki " does not readily appear in the Japanese language outside the scope of Budo . This has led to many possible interpretations of the word . <unk> is mainly used in compounds to mean ' combine , unite , join together , meet ' , examples being <unk> ( combined / united ) , <unk> ( composition ) , <unk> ( unite / combine / join together ) , <unk> ( union / alliance / association ) , <unk> ( combine / unify ) , and <unk> ( mutual agreement ) . There is an idea of reciprocity , <unk> ( to get to know one another ) , <unk> ( talk / discussion / negotiation ) , and <unk> ( meet by appointment ) . 
 気 is often used to describe a feeling , as in <unk> ( ' I feel X ' , as in terms of thinking but with less cognitive reasoning ) , and <unk> ( feeling / sensation ) ; it is used to mean energy or force , as in <unk> ( electricity ) and <unk> ( magnetism ) ; it can also refer to qualities or aspects of people or things , as in <unk> ( spirit / trait / temperament ) . 
 The term dō is also found in martial arts such as judo and kendo , and in various non @-@ martial arts , such as Japanese calligraphy ( <unk> ) , flower arranging ( <unk> ) and tea ceremony ( <unk> or <unk> ) . 
 Therefore , from a purely literal interpretation , aikido is the " Way of combining forces " , in that the term aiki refers to the martial arts principle or tactic of blending with an attacker 's movements for the purpose of controlling their actions with minimal effort . One applies aiki by understanding the rhythm and intent of the attacker to find the optimal position and timing to apply a counter @-@ technique . 
 = = History = = 
 Aikido was created by Morihei Ueshiba ( 植芝 <unk> Ueshiba Morihei , 14 December 1883 – 26 April 1969 ) , referred to by some aikido practitioners as <unk> ( " Great Teacher " ) . The term ' aikido ' was coined in the twentieth century . Ueshiba envisioned aikido not only as the synthesis of his martial training , but as an expression of his personal philosophy of universal peace and reconciliation . During Ueshiba 's lifetime and continuing today , aikido has evolved from the Aiki that Ueshiba studied into a variety of expressions by martial artists throughout the world . 
 = = = Initial development = = = 
 Ueshiba developed aikido primarily during the late 1920s through the 1930s through the synthesis of the older martial arts that he had studied . The core martial art from which aikido derives is Daitō @-@ ryū aiki @-@ jūjutsu , which Ueshiba studied directly with Takeda <unk> , the <unk> of that art . Additionally , Ueshiba is known to have studied Tenjin Shin 'yō @-@ ryū with Tozawa <unk> in Tokyo in 1901 , <unk> Yagyū <unk> @-@ ryū under Nakai Masakatsu in Sakai from 1903 to 1908 , and judo with Kiyoichi Takagi ( <unk> <unk> Takagi Kiyoichi , 1894 – 1972 ) in Tanabe in 1911 . 
 The art of Daitō @-@ ryū is the primary technical influence on aikido . Along with empty @-@ handed throwing and joint @-@ locking techniques , Ueshiba incorporated training movements with weapons , such as those for the spear ( <unk> ) , short staff ( jō ) , and perhaps the bayonet ( <unk> , <unk> ) . However , aikido derives much of its technical structure from the art of swordsmanship ( kenjutsu ) . 
 Ueshiba moved to Hokkaidō in 1912 , and began studying under Takeda Sokaku in 1915 . His official association with Daitō @-@ ryū continued until 1937 . However , during the latter part of that period , Ueshiba had already begun to distance himself from Takeda and the Daitō @-@ ryū . At that time Ueshiba was referring to his martial art as " Aiki Budō " . It is unclear exactly when Ueshiba began using the name " aikido " , but it became the official name of the art in 1942 when the Greater Japan Martial Virtue Society ( Dai Nippon Butoku Kai ) was engaged in a government sponsored reorganization and centralization of Japanese martial arts . 
 = = = Religious influences = = = 
 After Ueshiba left Hokkaidō in 1919 , he met and was profoundly influenced by Onisaburo Deguchi , the spiritual leader of the Ōmoto @-@ kyō religion ( a neo @-@ Shinto movement ) in Ayabe . One of the primary features of Ōmoto @-@ kyō is its emphasis on the attainment of utopia during one 's life . This was a great influence on Ueshiba 's martial arts philosophy of extending love and compassion especially to those who seek to harm others . Aikido demonstrates this philosophy in its emphasis on mastering martial arts so that one may receive an attack and harmlessly redirect it . In an ideal resolution , not only is the receiver unharmed , but so is the attacker . 
 In addition to the effect on his spiritual growth , the connection with Deguchi gave Ueshiba entry to elite political and military circles as a martial artist . As a result of this exposure , he was able to attract not only financial backing but also gifted students . Several of these students would found their own styles of aikido . 
 = = = International dissemination = = = 
 Aikido was first brought to the rest of the world in 1951 by Minoru Mochizuki with a visit to France where he introduced aikido techniques to judo students . He was followed by Tadashi Abe in 1952 , who came as the official Aikikai Hombu representative , remaining in France for seven years . Kenji Tomiki toured with a delegation of various martial arts through 15 continental states of the United States in 1953 . Later that year , Koichi Tohei was sent by Aikikai Hombu to Hawaii for a full year , where he set up several dojo . This trip was followed by several further visits and is considered the formal introduction of aikido to the United States . The United Kingdom followed in 1955 ; Italy in 1964 by Hiroshi Tada ; and Germany in 1965 by <unk> Asai . Designated " Official Delegate for Europe and Africa " by Morihei Ueshiba , Masamichi <unk> arrived in France in September 1961 . Seiichi <unk> was appointed to introduce aikido to Australia in 1965 . Today there are aikido dojo throughout the world . 
 = = = Proliferation of independent organizations = = = 
 The largest aikido organization is the Aikikai Foundation , which remains under the control of the Ueshiba family . However , aikido has many styles , mostly formed by Morihei Ueshiba 's major students . 
 The earliest independent styles to emerge were <unk> Aikido , begun by Minoru Mochizuki in 1931 , Yoshinkan Aikido , founded by Gozo Shioda in 1955 , and Shodokan Aikido , founded by Kenji Tomiki in 1967 . The emergence of these styles pre @-@ dated Ueshiba 's death and did not cause any major upheavals when they were formalized . Shodokan Aikido , however , was controversial , since it introduced a unique rule @-@ based competition that some felt was contrary to the spirit of aikido . 
 After Ueshiba 's death in 1969 , two more major styles emerged . Significant controversy arose with the departure of the Aikikai Hombu Dojo 's chief instructor Koichi Tohei , in 1974 . Tohei left as a result of a disagreement with the son of the founder , Kisshomaru Ueshiba , who at that time headed the Aikikai Foundation . The disagreement was over the proper role of ki development in regular aikido training . After Tohei left , he formed his own style , called Shin Shin <unk> Aikido , and the organization that governs it , the Ki Society ( Ki no <unk> ) . 
 A final major style evolved from Ueshiba 's retirement in Iwama , Ibaraki and the teaching methodology of long term student Morihiro Saito . It is unofficially referred to as the " Iwama style " , and at one point a number of its followers formed a loose network of schools they called Iwama Ryu . Although Iwama style practitioners remained part of the Aikikai until Saito 's death in 2002 , followers of Saito subsequently split into two groups . One remained with the Aikikai and the other formed the independent <unk> <unk> Kai in 2004 around Saito 's son <unk> Saito . 
 Today , the major styles of aikido are each run by a separate governing organization , have their own headquarters ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) in Japan , and have an international breadth . 
 = = Ki = = 
 The study of ki is an important component of aikido , and its study defies categorization as either " physical " or " mental " training , as it encompasses both . The kanji for ki normally is written as 気 . It was written as 氣 until the writing reforms after World War 2 , and this older form still is seen on occasion . 
 The character for ki is used in everyday Japanese terms , such as " health " ( <unk> , <unk> ) , or " shyness " ( <unk> , <unk> ) . Ki has many meanings , including " ambience " , " mind " , " mood " , and " intention " , however , in traditional martial arts it is often used to refer to " life energy " . <unk> Shioda 's Yoshinkan Aikido , considered one of the " hard styles , " largely follows Ueshiba 's teachings from before World War II , and surmises that the secret to ki lies in timing and the application of the whole body 's strength to a single point . In later years , Ueshiba 's application of ki in aikido took on a softer , more gentle feel . This was his <unk> Aiki and many of his later students teach about ki from this perspective . Koichi Tohei 's Ki Society centers almost exclusively around the study of the empirical ( albeit subjective ) experience of ki with students ranked separately in aikido techniques and ki development . 
 = = Training = = 
 In aikido , as in virtually all Japanese martial arts , there are both physical and mental aspects of training . The physical training in aikido is diverse , covering both general physical fitness and conditioning , as well as specific techniques . Because a substantial portion of any aikido curriculum consists of throws , beginners learn how to safely fall or roll . The specific techniques for attack include both strikes and grabs ; the techniques for defense consist of throws and pins . After basic techniques are learned , students study freestyle defense against multiple opponents , and techniques with weapons . 
 = = = Fitness = = = 
 Physical training goals pursued in conjunction with aikido include controlled relaxation , correct movement of joints such as hips and shoulders , flexibility , and endurance , with less emphasis on strength training . In aikido , pushing or extending movements are much more common than pulling or contracting movements . This distinction can be applied to general fitness goals for the aikido practitioner . 
 In aikido , specific muscles or muscle groups are not isolated and worked to improve tone , mass , or power . Aikido @-@ related training emphasizes the use of coordinated whole @-@ body movement and balance similar to yoga or pilates . For example , many dojos begin each class with warm @-@ up exercises ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , which may include stretching and ukemi ( break falls ) . 
 = = = Roles of uke and tori = = = 
 Aikido training is based primarily on two partners practicing pre @-@ arranged forms ( kata ) rather than freestyle practice . The basic pattern is for the receiver of the technique ( uke ) to initiate an attack against the person who applies the technique — the <unk> tori , or shite <unk> ( depending on aikido style ) , also referred to as <unk> nage ( when applying a throwing technique ) , who neutralises this attack with an aikido technique . 
 Both halves of the technique , that of uke and that of tori , are considered essential to aikido training . Both are studying aikido principles of blending and adaptation . Tori learns to blend with and control attacking energy , while uke learns to become calm and flexible in the disadvantageous , off @-@ balance positions in which tori places them . This " receiving " of the technique is called ukemi . Uke continuously seeks to regain balance and cover vulnerabilities ( e.g. , an exposed side ) , while tori uses position and timing to keep uke off @-@ balance and vulnerable . In more advanced training , uke will sometimes apply reversal techniques ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ waza ) to regain balance and pin or throw tori . 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) refers to the act of receiving a technique . Good ukemi involves attention to the technique , the partner and the immediate environment — it is an active rather than a passive receiving of aikido . The fall itself is part of aikido , and is a way for the practitioner to receive , safely , what would otherwise be a devastating strike or throw . 
 = = = Initial attacks = = = 
 Aikido techniques are usually a defense against an attack , so students must learn to deliver various types of attacks to be able to practice aikido with a partner . Although attacks are not studied as thoroughly as in striking @-@ based arts , sincere attacks ( a strong strike or an immobilizing grab ) are needed to study correct and effective application of technique . 
 Many of the strikes ( <unk> , uchi ) of aikido resemble cuts from a sword or other grasped object , which indicate its origins in techniques intended for armed combat . Other techniques , which explicitly appear to be punches ( tsuki ) , are practiced as thrusts with a knife or sword . Kicks are generally reserved for upper @-@ level variations ; reasons cited include that falls from kicks are especially dangerous , and that kicks ( high kicks in particular ) were uncommon during the types of combat prevalent in feudal Japan . Some basic strikes include : 
 Front @-@ of @-@ the @-@ head strike ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) a vertical <unk> strike to the head . In training , this is usually directed at the forehead or the crown for safety , but more dangerous versions of this attack target the bridge of the nose and the maxillary sinus . 
 Side @-@ of @-@ the @-@ head strike ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) a diagonal <unk> strike to the side of the head or neck . 
 Chest thrust ( <unk> , mune @-@ tsuki ) a punch to the torso . Specific targets include the chest , abdomen , and solar plexus . Same as " middle @-@ level thrust " ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ tsuki ) , and " direct thrust " ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ tsuki ) . 
 Face thrust ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ tsuki ) a punch to the face . Same as " upper @-@ level thrust " ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ tsuki ) . 
 Beginners in particular often practice techniques from grabs , both because they are safer and because it is easier to feel the energy and lines of force of a hold than a strike . Some grabs are historically derived from being held while trying to draw a weapon ; a technique could then be used to free oneself and immobilize or strike the attacker who is grabbing the defender . The following are examples of some basic grabs : 
 Single @-@ hand grab ( <unk> , katate @-@ dori ) one hand grabs one wrist . 
 Both @-@ hands grab ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ dori ) both hands grab one wrist . Same as " single hand double @-@ handed grab " ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ dori ) 
 Both @-@ hands grab ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ dori ) both hands grab both wrists . Same as " double single @-@ handed grab " ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ dori ) . 
 Shoulder grab ( <unk> , kata @-@ dori ) a shoulder grab . " Both @-@ shoulders @-@ grab " is <unk> @-@ dori ( <unk> ) . It is sometimes combined with an overhead strike as Shoulder grab face strike ( <unk> , kata @-@ dori men @-@ uchi ) . 
 Chest grab ( <unk> , mune @-@ dori or <unk> @-@ dori ) grabbing the ( clothing of the ) chest . Same as " collar grab " ( <unk> , eri @-@ dori ) . 
 = = = Basic techniques = = = 
 The following are a sample of the basic or widely practiced throws and pins . Many of these techniques derive from Daitō @-@ ryū Aiki @-@ jūjutsu , but some others were invented by Morihei Ueshiba . The precise terminology for some may vary between organisations and styles , so what follows are the terms used by the Aikikai Foundation . Note that despite the names of the first five techniques listed , they are not universally taught in numeric order . 
 First technique ( <unk> ( <unk> ) , ikkyō ) a control using one hand on the elbow and one hand near the wrist which leverages uke to the ground . This grip applies pressure into the ulnar nerve at the wrist . 
 Second technique ( <unk> , <unk> ) a <unk> wristlock that torques the arm and applies painful nerve pressure . ( There is an adductive wristlock or Z @-@ lock in ura version . ) 
 Third technique ( <unk> , <unk> ) a rotational wristlock that directs upward @-@ spiraling tension throughout the arm , elbow and shoulder . 
 Fourth technique ( <unk> , <unk> ) a shoulder control similar to ikkyō , but with both hands gripping the forearm . The knuckles ( from the palm side ) are applied to the recipient 's radial nerve against the <unk> of the forearm bone . 
 Fifth technique ( <unk> , <unk> ) visually similar to ikkyō , but with an inverted grip of the wrist , medial rotation of the arm and shoulder , and downward pressure on the elbow . Common in knife and other weapon take @-@ aways . 
 Four @-@ direction throw ( <unk> , <unk> ) The hand is folded back past the shoulder , locking the shoulder joint . 
 Forearm return ( <unk> , <unk> ) a <unk> wristlock @-@ throw that stretches the extensor <unk> . 
 Breath throw ( <unk> , <unk> ) a loosely used term for various types of mechanically unrelated techniques , although they generally do not use joint locks like other techniques . 
 Entering throw ( <unk> , <unk> ) throws in which tori moves through the space occupied by uke . The classic form superficially resembles a " clothesline " technique . 
 Heaven @-@ and @-@ earth throw ( <unk> , <unk> ) beginning with <unk> @-@ dori ; moving forward , tori sweeps one hand low ( " earth " ) and the other high ( " heaven " ) , which <unk> uke so that he or she easily topples over . 
 Hip throw ( <unk> , <unk> ) aikido 's version of the hip throw . Tori drops his or her hips lower than those of uke , then flips uke over the resultant fulcrum . 
 Figure @-@ ten throw ( <unk> , <unk> ) or figure @-@ ten entanglement ( <unk> , <unk> ) a throw that locks the arms against each other ( The kanji for " 10 " is a cross @-@ shape : <unk> ) . 
 Rotary throw ( <unk> , <unk> ) Tori sweeps the arm back until it locks the shoulder joint , then uses forward pressure to throw . 
 = = = Implementations = = = 
 Aikido makes use of body movement ( tai <unk> ) to blend with uke . For example , an " entering " ( <unk> ) technique consists of movements inward towards uke , while a " turning " ( <unk> , <unk> ) technique uses a pivoting motion . Additionally , an " inside " ( <unk> , uchi ) technique takes place in front of uke , whereas an " outside " ( <unk> , soto ) technique takes place to his side ; a " front " ( <unk> , omote ) technique is applied with motion to the front of uke , and a " rear " ( <unk> , ura ) version is applied with motion towards the rear of uke , usually by incorporating a turning or pivoting motion . Finally , most techniques can be performed while in a seated posture ( seiza ) . Techniques where both uke and tori are standing are called tachi @-@ waza , techniques where both start off in seiza are called <unk> @-@ waza , and techniques performed with uke standing and tori sitting are called <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 Thus , from fewer than twenty basic techniques , there are thousands of possible implementations . For instance , ikkyō can be applied to an opponent moving forward with a strike ( perhaps with an ura type of movement to redirect the incoming force ) , or to an opponent who has already struck and is now moving back to reestablish distance ( perhaps an omote @-@ waza version ) . Specific aikido kata are typically referred to with the formula " attack @-@ technique ( <unk> ) " . For instance , katate @-@ dori ikkyō refers to any ikkyō technique executed when uke is holding one wrist . This could be further specified as katate @-@ dori ikkyō omote , referring to any forward @-@ moving ikkyō technique from that grab . 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) are strikes ( or feints ) employed during an aikido technique . Some view atemi as attacks against " vital points " meant to cause damage in and of themselves . For instance , <unk> Shioda described using atemi in a brawl to quickly down a gang 's leader . Others consider atemi , especially to the face , to be methods of distraction meant to enable other techniques . A strike , whether or not it is blocked , can startle the target and break his or her concentration . The target may become unbalanced in attempting to avoid the blow , for example by jerking the head back , which may allow for an easier throw . Many sayings about atemi are attributed to Morihei Ueshiba , who considered them an essential element of technique . 
 = = = Weapons = = = 
 Weapons training in aikido traditionally includes the short staff ( jō ) , wooden sword ( bokken ) , and knife ( tantō ) . Some schools incorporate firearm @-@ disarming techniques . Both weapon @-@ taking and weapon @-@ retention are taught . Some schools , such as the Iwama style of Morihiro Saito , usually spend substantial time with bokken and jō , practised under the names aiki @-@ ken , and aiki @-@ jō , respectively . 
 The founder developed many of the empty @-@ handed techniques from traditional sword and spear movements . Consequently , the practice of the weapons arts gives insight into the origin of techniques and movements , and reinforces the concepts of distance , timing , foot movement , presence and connectedness with one 's training partner ( s ) . 
 = = = Multiple attackers and randori = = = 
 One feature of aikido is training to defend against multiple attackers , often called <unk> , or <unk> . Freestyle practice with multiple attackers , called randori ( <unk> ) or <unk> ( <unk> ) , is a key part of most curricula and is required for the higher level ranks . <unk> exercises a person 's ability to intuitively perform techniques in an unstructured environment . Strategic choice of techniques , based on how they reposition the student relative to other attackers , is important in randori training . For instance , an ura technique might be used to neutralise the current attacker while turning to face attackers approaching from behind . 
 In Shodokan Aikido , randori differs in that it is not performed with multiple persons with defined roles of defender and attacker , but between two people , where both participants attack , defend , and counter at will . In this respect it resembles judo randori . 
 = = = Injuries = = = 
 In applying a technique during training , it is the responsibility of tori to prevent injury to uke by employing a speed and force of application that is commensurate with their partner 's proficiency in ukemi . Injuries ( especially those to the joints ) , when they do occur in aikido , are often the result of tori misjudging the ability of uke to receive the throw or pin . 
 A study of injuries in the martial arts showed that the type of injuries varied considerably from one art to the other . Soft tissue injuries are one of the most common types of injuries found within aikido , as well as joint strain and <unk> fingers and toes . Several deaths from head @-@ and @-@ neck injuries , caused by aggressive <unk> in a <unk> / kōhai hazing context , have been reported . 
 = = = Mental training = = = 
 Aikido training is mental as well as physical , emphasizing the ability to relax the mind and body even under the stress of dangerous situations . This is necessary to enable the practitioner to perform the bold enter @-@ and @-@ blend movements that underlie aikido techniques , wherein an attack is met with confidence and directness . Morihei Ueshiba once remarked that one " must be willing to receive 99 % of an opponent 's attack and stare death in the face " in order to execute techniques without hesitation . As a martial art concerned not only with fighting proficiency but with the betterment of daily life , this mental aspect is of key importance to aikido practitioners . 
 = = Uniforms and ranking = = 
 Aikido practitioners ( commonly called <unk> outside Japan ) generally progress by promotion through a series of " grades " ( kyū ) , followed by a series of " degrees " ( dan ) , pursuant to formal testing procedures . Some aikido organizations use belts to distinguish practitioners ' grades , often simply white and black belts to distinguish kyu and dan grades , though some use various belt colors . Testing requirements vary , so a particular rank in one organization is not comparable or interchangeable with the rank of another . Some dojos do not allow students to take the test to obtain a dan rank unless they are 16 or older . 
 The uniform worn for practicing aikido ( <unk> ) is similar to the training uniform ( <unk> ) used in most other modern martial arts ; simple trousers and a wraparound jacket , usually white . Both thick ( " judo @-@ style " ) , and thin ( " karate @-@ style " ) cotton tops are used . Aikido @-@ specific tops are available with shorter sleeves which reach to just below the elbow . 
 Most aikido systems add a pair of wide pleated black or indigo trousers called a hakama ( used also in kendo and <unk> ) . In many schools , its use is reserved for practitioners with ( dan ) ranks or for instructors , while others allow all practitioners to wear a hakama regardless of rank . 
 = = Criticisms = = 
 The most common criticism of aikido is that it suffers from a lack of realism in training . The attacks initiated by uke ( and which tori must defend against ) have been criticized as being " weak , " " sloppy , " and " little more than caricatures of an attack . " Weak attacks from uke allow for a conditioned response from tori , and result in underdevelopment of the skills needed for the safe and effective practice of both partners . To counteract this , some styles allow students to become less compliant over time but , in keeping with the core philosophies , this is after having demonstrated proficiency in being able to protect themselves and their training partners . Shodokan Aikido addresses the issue by practising in a competitive format . Such adaptations are debated between styles , with some maintaining that there is no need to adjust their methods because either the criticisms are unjustified , or that they are not training for self @-@ defense or combat effectiveness , but spiritual , fitness or other reasons . 
 Another criticism pertains to the shift toward ki as the focus of training . After the end of Ueshiba 's seclusion in Iwama from 1942 to the mid @-@ 1950s , he increasingly emphasized the spiritual and philosophical aspects of aikido . As a result , strikes to vital points by tori , entering ( <unk> ) and initiation of techniques by tori , the distinction between omote ( front side ) and ura ( back side ) techniques , and the use of weapons , were all de @-@ emphasized or eliminated from practice . Some Aikido practitioners feel that lack of training in these areas leads to an overall loss of effectiveness . 
 Conversely , some styles of aikido receive criticism for not placing enough importance on the spiritual practices emphasized by Ueshiba . According to Minoru Shibata of Aikido Journal , " O @-@ Sensei 's aikido was not a continuation and extension of the old and has a distinct discontinuity with past martial and philosophical concepts . " That is , that aikido practitioners who focus on aikido 's roots in traditional jujutsu or kenjutsu are diverging from what Ueshiba taught . Such critics urge practitioners to embrace the assertion that " [ Ueshiba 's ] transcendence to the spiritual and universal reality were the fundamentals [ sic ] of the paradigm that he demonstrated . " 
 = Henry <unk> Pellew Crease = 
 Sir Henry <unk> Pellew Crease ( 20 August 1823 – 27 November 1905 ) was a British lawyer , judge , and politician , influential in the colonies of Vancouver Island and British Columbia . He was the first Attorney General of the united Colony of British Columbia , and sat on the Supreme Court of that province for 26 years . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Crease was born at Ince Castle , in Cornwall , the son of a Royal Navy captain . He earned his BA from Clare College , Cambridge and then studied law at the Middle Temple . Though called to the bar in June 1849 , he did not immediately pursue his career in law . Instead he joined his parents in an unsuccessful canal building endeavour in Upper Canada . After only a short turn as a barrister on his return to England , he took a job in Cornwall managing a tin mine owned by Great Wheal Vor United Mines , which ended with his employer suing him . 
 By the time Crease left again for Canada in April 1858 , he had married Sarah Lindley and had three young daughters , Susan , Mary , and Barbara . Sarah was the daughter of the famous botanist , John Lindley . She was also a talented amateur artist , and would go on to create many drawings and watercolours of early BC . Unable to find work in Toronto , Henry decided to try his luck in Victoria , and arrived there in December . 
 = = Lawyer and politician = = 
 Upon his arrival in Victoria , Crease was admitted as a barrister to the courts of Vancouver Island and British Columbia , becoming the first lawyer qualified to practice in both jurisdictions . Crease opened a practice in Victoria , sent for his family , and soon found himself travelling with Supreme Court Judge Matthew Baillie Begbie on his first circuit , dealing out justice on the frontier as a Crown prosecutor in the midst of the Gold Rush . 
 Politically , Crease presented himself as a foe of the Hudson 's Bay Company 's hegemony over the colony , and in 1860 was elected to the Vancouver Island House of Assembly as an independent member representing Victoria . However , he was soon criticised by the British Colonist ( a paper run by opposition leader Amor de Cosmos ) for being too cozy with the HBC @-@ backed government . The following year , as if to prove de Cosmos right , governor Sir James Douglas appointed Crease Attorney @-@ General of British Columbia , and Crease resigned his seat in the Assembly . He was a key member of the government , responsible for pushing literally hundreds of laws through the legislature , in between his continuing circuit tours , most of which was concerned with regulating the resource @-@ based economic activity of the colony , including land settlement and gold mining . His legislation cemented his reputation as an advocate of free trade . 
 Even as a colonial pioneer , Crease clung to the aristocratic traditions of Britain . The Crease family 's home in New Westminster was Ince Cottage , on <unk> Road , named for the castle that belonged to Henry 's mother 's family in England . He sent his sons to Haileybury College in England for their schooling , and was dismayed to note that , " While you and I talk of the Old Country as ' Home , ' all our children call Canada ' home . ' " 
 When the colonies were joined in 1866 Crease became the first Attorney General of the united British Columbia . In 1868 the colonial capital was moved to Victoria , and the <unk> moved with it . There they built a new home , <unk> , on Fort Street . 
 In Victoria , as in New Westminster , Crease was active in many community organisations : the Church of England , Royal Colonial Institute , and the Law Society of British Columbia , which he was key in founding . He sat on the board of the Colonial Securities Company , and was a lieutenant in the Seymour Artillery Company . 
 At a time when British policy called for North American colonies to extinguish native title by means of treaties , the British Columbia government , including Crease , made no effort to negotiate treaties . Indeed , when the issue was raised in the legislature in 1870 , Attorney General Crease objected to the mere discussion of the issue as potentially damaging , " for Indians do get word of what 's going on . " In response to the criticism that the government had no Indian policy , Crease stated simply that " our policy has been , let the Indians alone . " 
 = = BC Supreme Court judge = = 
 In 1870 he was appointed a judge of the Supreme Court of British Columbia and retired from his government post . Crease was suspicious of both Confederation and responsible government , largely because they threatened greater government control over judges and central Canadian domination of patronage . Like many British Columbians , he was disappointed that London seemed to have given up on BC as an independent colony , abandoning either it to annexation to the United States or confederation with Canada . " I believe that England is sick of her Colonies , " he wrote , " and to be a Colonist , whatever your <unk> & <unk> when at Home – is to lose Caste the moment you become a bona fide settler . " Regardless of his opposition to Confederation , Crease was chosen to prepare for it as the chair of the Royal Commission for the Revision of Laws of BC . 
 After BC became a Canadian province in 1871 , Crease devoted the next few years to fighting for judicial independence — specifically the right of judges to live outside their districts . In 1881 the BC Supreme Court , including Crease , ruled in the Thrasher case that the province 's attempts to regulate judges were unconstitutional . This decision was overturned two years later by the Supreme Court of Canada . 
 In 1882 , Crease presided over the trial of John Hall , who owned most of the land on Burrard Inlet that now makes up the community of Belcarra , British Columbia , and who was accused of murdering his mother in law . Hall and Crease had known each other for years , and Crease had once employed him as his agent in a dispute with trespassers who illegally logged on land he and his friend Robert Burnaby owned near Hall 's ranch . Hall was found guilty of manslaughter , and his land signed over to his attorney to pay for his defence . 
 In 1884 , Crease overturned the Chinese Population Regulation Bill , which imposed an annual tax of ten dollars on each Chinese over the age of ten . He ruled that the provincial government had acted beyond its constitutional authority in passing the act , which fell within federal powers of taxation . The next year , as a member of the Royal Commission on Chinese Immigration , Crease wrote that " The real fact is , and the more completely it is recognized the better , that we cannot do without a certain number of Chinese for manual labour and for domestic servants , " but went on to warn that Chinese immigrants " will never assimilate with the Anglo @-@ Saxon race , nor is it desirable that they should … They do not regard British Columbia as their home and when they die send their bones home to be buried in China . " 
 Sitting on several Royal commissions , the Exchequer Court of Canada , and the BC Supreme Court , Crease remained an influential figure long after his defeat in the Thrasher case . However , federal Justice Minister Sir Charles Hibbert Tupper was not impressed with Crease 's judgment toward the end of his career and pushed for Crease 's retirement in a letter to BC Supreme Court Chief Justice Theodore Davie . Crease retired soon afterward in January 1896 . On 23 January 1896 Crease was knighted . He died in 1905 and was buried at Ross Bay Cemetery in Victoria . 
 = Bryce Canyon National Park = 
 Bryce Canyon National Park / <unk> / is a National Park located in southwestern Utah in the United States . The major feature of the park is Bryce Canyon , which despite its name , is not a canyon , but a collection of giant natural amphitheaters along the eastern side of the Paunsaugunt Plateau . Bryce is distinctive due to geological structures called hoodoos , formed by frost weathering and stream erosion of the river and lake bed sedimentary rocks . The red , orange , and white colors of the rocks provide spectacular views for park visitors . Bryce sits at a much higher elevation than nearby Zion National Park . The rim at Bryce varies from 8 @,@ 000 to 9 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 400 to 2 @,@ 700 m ) . 
 The Bryce Canyon area was settled by Mormon pioneers in the 1850s and was named after Ebenezer Bryce , who homesteaded in the area in 1874 . The area around Bryce Canyon became a National Monument in 1923 and was designated as a National Park in 1928 . The park covers 35 @,@ 835 acres ( 55 @.@ 992 sq mi ; 14 @,@ 502 ha ; 145 @.@ 02 km2 ) and receives relatively few visitors compared to Zion National Park and the Grand Canyon , largely due to its remote location . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Bryce Canyon National Park is located in southwestern Utah about 50 miles ( 80 km ) northeast of and 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) higher than Zion National Park . The weather in Bryce Canyon is therefore cooler , and the park receives more precipitation : a total of 15 to 18 inches ( 380 to 460 mm ) per year . Yearly temperatures vary from an average minimum of 9 ° F ( − 13 ° C ) in January to an average maximum of 83 ° F ( 28 ° C ) in July , but extreme temperatures can range from − 30 to 97 ° F ( − 34 to 36 ° C ) . The record high temperature in the park was 98 ° F ( 37 ° C ) on July 14 , 2002 . The record low temperature was − 28 ° F ( − 33 ° C ) on December 10 , 1972 . 
 The national park lies within the Colorado Plateau geographic province of North America and straddles the southeastern edge of the Paunsaugunt Plateau west of the Paunsaugunt Fault ( Paunsaugunt is Paiute for " home of the beaver " ) . Park visitors arrive from the plateau part of the park and look over the plateau 's edge toward a valley containing the fault and the Paria River just beyond it ( Paria is Paiute for " muddy or elk water " ) . The edge of the Kaiparowits Plateau bounds the opposite side of the valley . 
 Bryce Canyon was not formed from erosion initiated from a central stream , meaning it technically is not a canyon . Instead headward erosion has excavated large amphitheater @-@ shaped features in the Cenozoic @-@ aged rocks of the Paunsaugunt Plateau . This erosion exposed delicate and colorful pinnacles called hoodoos that are up to 200 feet ( 60 m ) high . A series of amphitheaters extends more than 20 miles ( 30 km ) north @-@ to @-@ south within the park . The largest is Bryce Amphitheater , which is 12 miles ( 19 km ) long , 3 miles ( 5 km ) wide and 800 feet ( 240 m ) deep . A nearby example of amphitheaters with hoodoos in the same formation but at a higher elevation , is in Cedar Breaks National Monument , which is 25 miles ( 40 km ) to the west on the Markagunt Plateau . 
 Rainbow Point , the highest part of the park at 9 @,@ 105 feet ( 2 @,@ 775 m ) , is at the end of the 18 @-@ mile ( 29 km ) scenic drive . From there , Aquarius Plateau , Bryce Amphitheater , the Henry Mountains , the Vermilion Cliffs and the White Cliffs can be seen . Yellow Creek , where it exits the park in the north @-@ east section , is the lowest part of the park at 6 @,@ 620 feet ( 2 @,@ 020 m ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Native American habitation = = = 
 Little is known about early human habitation in the Bryce Canyon area . Archaeological surveys of Bryce Canyon National Park and the Paunsaugunt Plateau show that people have been in the area for at least 10 @,@ 000 years . Basketmaker Anasazi artifacts several thousand years old have been found south of the park . Other artifacts from the Pueblo @-@ period Anasazi and the Fremont culture ( up to the mid @-@ 12th century ) have also been found . 
 The Paiute Indians moved into the surrounding valleys and plateaus in the area around the same time that the other cultures left . These Native Americans hunted and gathered for most of their food , but also supplemented their diet with some cultivated products . The Paiute in the area developed a mythology surrounding the hoodoos ( pinnacles ) in Bryce Canyon . They believed that hoodoos were the Legend People whom the trickster Coyote turned to stone . At least one older Paiute said his culture called the hoodoos Anka @-@ ku @-@ was @-@ a @-@ wits , which is Paiute for " red painted faces " . 
 = = = European American exploration and settlement = = = 
 It was not until the late 18th and the early 19th century that the first European Americans explored the remote and hard @-@ to @-@ reach area . Mormon scouts visited the area in the 1850s to gauge its potential for agricultural development , use for grazing , and settlement . 
 The first major scientific expedition to the area was led by U.S. Army Major John Wesley Powell in 1872 . Powell , along with a team of mapmakers and geologists , surveyed the Sevier and Virgin River area as part of a larger survey of the Colorado Plateaus . His mapmakers kept many of the Paiute place names . 
 Small groups of Mormon pioneers followed and attempted to settle east of Bryce Canyon along the Paria River . In 1873 , the <unk> Cattle Company started to use the area for cattle grazing . 
 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints sent Scottish immigrant Ebenezer Bryce and his wife Mary to settle land in the Paria Valley because they thought his carpentry skills would be useful in the area . The Bryce family chose to live right below Bryce Canyon Amphitheater . Bryce grazed his cattle inside what are now park borders , and reputedly thought that the amphitheaters were a " helluva place to lose a cow . " He also built a road to the plateau to retrieve firewood and timber , and a canal to irrigate his crops and water his animals . Other settlers soon started to call the unusual place " Bryce 's canyon " , which was later formalized into Bryce Canyon . 
 A combination of drought , overgrazing and flooding eventually drove the remaining Paiutes from the area and prompted the settlers to attempt construction of a water diversion channel from the Sevier River drainage . When that effort failed , most of the settlers , including the Bryce family , left the area . Bryce moved his family to Arizona in 1880 . The remaining settlers dug a 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) ditch from the Sevier 's east fork into Tropic Valley . 
 = = = Creation of the park = = = 
 These scenic areas were first described for the public in magazine articles published by Union Pacific and Santa Fe railroads in 1916 . People like Forest Supervisor J. W. Humphrey promoted the scenic wonders of Bryce Canyon 's amphitheaters , and by 1918 nationally distributed articles also helped to spark interest . However , poor access to the remote area and the lack of accommodations kept visitation to a bare minimum . 
 Ruby Syrett , Harold Bowman and the Perry brothers later built modest lodging , and set up " touring services " in the area . Syrett later served as the first postmaster of Bryce Canyon . Visitation steadily increased , and by the early 1920s the Union Pacific Railroad became interested in expanding rail service into southwestern Utah to accommodate more tourists . 
 At the same time , conservationists became alarmed by the damage overgrazing , logging , and unregulated visitation were having on the fragile features of Bryce Canyon . A movement to have the area protected was soon started , and National Park Service Director Stephen Mather responded by proposing that Bryce Canyon be made into a state park . The governor of Utah and the Utah State Legislature , however , lobbied for national protection of the area . Mather relented and sent his recommendation to President Warren G. Harding , who on June 8 , 1923 declared Bryce Canyon a national monument . 
 A road was built the same year on the plateau to provide easy access to outlooks over the amphitheaters . From 1924 to 1925 , Bryce Canyon Lodge was built from local timber and stone . 
 Members of the United States Congress started work in 1924 on upgrading Bryce Canyon 's protection status from a U.S. National Monument to a National Park in order to establish Utah National Park . A process led by the Utah Parks Company for transferring ownership of private and state @-@ held land in the monument to the federal government started in 1923 . The last of the land in the proposed park 's borders was sold to the federal government four years later , and on February 25 , 1928 , the renamed Bryce Canyon National Park was established . 
 In 1931 , President Herbert Hoover annexed an adjoining area south of the park , and in 1942 an additional 635 acres ( 257 ha ) was added . This brought the park 's total area to the current figure of 35 @,@ 835 acres ( 14 @,@ 502 ha ) . Rim Road , the scenic drive that is still used today , was completed in 1934 by the Civilian Conservation Corps . Administration of the park was conducted from neighboring Zion National Park until 1956 , when Bryce Canyon 's first superintendent started work . 
 = = = More recent history = = = 
 The USS Bryce Canyon was named for the park and served as a supply and repair ship in the U.S. Pacific Fleet from September 15 , 1950 , to June 30 , 1981 . 
 Bryce Canyon Natural History Association ( <unk> ) was established in 1961 . It runs the bookstore inside the park visitor center and is a non @-@ profit organization created to aid the interpretive , educational and scientific activities of the National Park Service at Bryce Canyon National Park . A portion of the profits from all bookstore sales are donated to public land units . 
 Responding to increased visitation and traffic congestion , the National Park Service implemented a voluntary , summer @-@ only , in @-@ park shuttle system in June 2000 . In 2004 , reconstruction began on the aging and inadequate road system in the park . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Bryce Canyon area shows a record of deposition that spans from the last part of the Cretaceous period and the first half of the Cenozoic era . The ancient depositional environment of the region around what is now the park varied . The Dakota Sandstone and the Tropic Shale were deposited in the warm , shallow waters of the advancing and retreating Cretaceous Seaway ( outcrops of these rocks are found just outside park borders ) . The colorful Claron Formation , from which the park 's delicate hoodoos are carved , was laid down as sediments in a system of cool streams and lakes that existed from 63 to about 40 million years ago ( from the Paleocene to the Eocene epochs ) . Different sediment types were laid down as the lakes deepened and became shallow and as the shoreline and river deltas migrated . 
 Several other formations were also created but were mostly eroded away following two major periods of uplift . The Laramide orogeny affected the entire western part of what would become North America starting about 70 million to 50 million years ago . This event helped to build the Rocky Mountains and in the process closed the Cretaceous Seaway . The Straight Cliffs , <unk> , and Kaiparowits formations were victims of this uplift . The Colorado Plateaus were uplifted 16 million years ago and were segmented into different plateaus , each separated from its neighbors by faults and each having its own uplift rate . The Boat Mesa Conglomerate and the Sevier River Formation were removed by erosion following this uplift . 
 This uplift created vertical joints , which over time were preferentially eroded . The soft Pink Cliffs of the Claron Formation were eroded to form freestanding pinnacles in badlands called hoodoos , while the more resistant White Cliffs formed monoliths . The brown , pink and red colors are from hematite ( iron oxide ; Fe 
 2O 
 3 ) ; the yellows from limonite ( FeO ( OH ) · nH 
 2O ) ; and the purples are from pyrolusite ( MnO 
 2 ) . Also created were arches , natural bridges , walls , and windows . <unk> are composed of soft sedimentary rock and are topped by a piece of harder , less easily eroded stone that protects the column from the elements . Bryce Canyon has one of the highest concentrations of hoodoos of any place on Earth . 
 The formations exposed in the area of the park are part of the Grand Staircase . The oldest members of this supersequence of rock units are exposed in the Grand Canyon , the intermediate ones in Zion National Park , and its youngest parts are laid bare in Bryce Canyon area . A small amount of overlap occurs in and around each park . 
 = = Biology = = 
 More than 400 native plant species live in the park . There are three life zones in the park based on elevation : The lowest areas of the park are dominated by dwarf forests of pinyon pine and juniper with manzanita , serviceberry , and antelope bitterbrush in <unk> aspen , cottonwood , water birch , and willow grow along streams . Ponderosa pine forests cover the mid @-@ elevations with blue spruce and Douglas fir in water @-@ rich areas and manzanita and bitterbrush as underbrush . Douglas fir and white fir , along with aspen and Engelmann spruce , make up the forests on the Paunsaugunt Plateau . The harshest areas have limber pine and ancient Great Basin bristlecone pine , some more than 1 @,@ 600 years old , holding on . 
 The forests and meadows of Bryce Canyon provide the habitat to support diverse animal life including foxes , badgers , porcupines , elk , black bears , bobcats , and woodpeckers . Mule deer are the most common large mammals in the park . Elk and pronghorn , which have been reintroduced nearby , sometimes venture into the park . 
 Bryce Canyon National Park forms part of the habitat of three wildlife species that are listed under the Endangered Species Act : the Utah prairie dog , the California condor , and the southwestern willow flycatcher . The Utah prairie dog is a threatened species that was reintroduced to the park for conservation , and the largest protected population is found within the park 's boundaries . 
 About 170 species of birds visit the park each year , including swifts and swallows . Most species migrate to warmer regions in winter , although jays , ravens , nuthatches , eagles , and owls stay . In winter , the mule deer , cougars , and coyotes migrate to lower elevations . Ground squirrels and marmots pass the winter in hibernation . 
 Eleven species of reptiles and four species of amphibians have been found in the park . Reptiles include the Great Basin rattlesnake , short @-@ horned lizard , side @-@ blotched lizard , striped <unk> , and the tiger salamander . 
 Also in the park are the black , lumpy , very slow @-@ growing colonies of cryptobiotic soil , which are a mix of lichens , algae , fungi , and cyanobacteria . Together these organisms slow erosion , add nitrogen to soil , and help it to retain moisture . 
 = = Activities = = 
 Most park visitors sightsee using the scenic drive , which provides access to 13 viewpoints over the amphitheaters . Bryce Canyon has eight marked and maintained hiking trails that can be hiked in less than a day ( round trip time , trailhead ) : Mossy Cave ( one hour , State Route 12 northwest of Tropic ) , Rim Trail ( 5 – 6 hours , anywhere on rim ) , Bristlecone Loop ( one hour , Rainbow Point ) , and Queens Garden ( 1 – 2 hours , Sunrise Point ) are easy to moderate hikes . Navajo Loop ( 1 – 2 hours , Sunset Point ) and Tower Bridge ( 2 – 3 hours , north of Sunrise Point ) are moderate hikes . Fairyland Loop ( 4 – 5 hours , Fairyland Point ) and Peekaboo Loop ( 3 – 4 hours , Bryce Point ) are strenuous hikes . Several of these trails intersect , allowing hikers to combine routes for more challenging hikes . 
 The park also has two trails designated for overnight hiking : the 9 @-@ mile ( 14 km ) Riggs Spring Loop Trail and the 23 @-@ mile ( 37 km ) Under @-@ the @-@ Rim Trail . Both require a backcountry camping permit . In total there are 50 miles ( 80 km ) of trails in the park . 
 More than 10 miles ( 16 km ) of marked but ungroomed skiing trails are available off of Fairyland , Paria , and Rim trails in the park . Twenty miles ( 32 km ) of connecting groomed ski trails are in nearby Dixie National Forest and Ruby 's Inn . 
 The air in the area is so clear that on most days from <unk> and Rainbow points , Navajo Mountain and the Kaibab Plateau can be seen 90 miles ( 140 km ) away in Arizona . On extremely clear days , the Black <unk> of eastern Arizona and western New Mexico can be seen some 160 miles ( 260 km ) away . 
 The park also has a 7 @.@ 4 magnitude night sky , making it one of the darkest in North America . <unk> can , therefore , see 7 @,@ 500 stars with the naked eye , while in most places fewer than 2 @,@ 000 can be seen due to light pollution , and in many large cities only a few dozen can be seen . Park rangers host public stargazing events and evening programs on astronomy , nocturnal animals , and night sky protection . The Bryce Canyon Astronomy Festival , typically held in June , attracts thousands of visitors . In honor of this astronomy festival , Asteroid <unk> was named after the national park . 
 There are two campgrounds in the park , North Campground and Sunset Campground . Loop A in North Campground is open year @-@ round . Additional loops and Sunset Campground are open from late spring to early autumn . The 114 @-@ room Bryce Canyon Lodge is another way to stay overnight in the park . 
 = Skinners Falls – Milanville Bridge = 
 The Skinners Falls – Milanville Bridge is a bridge spanning the Delaware River between Milanville , Pennsylvania and Skinners Falls , New York in Wayne County , Pennsylvania and Sullivan County , New York . The bridge is 470 feet ( 140 m ) long and holds one single lane of Skinners Falls Road , a local road . The bridge was constructed by the American Bridge Company and funded by the Milanville Bridge Company . The bridge replaced a ferry run by <unk> Daniel Skinner and his family . The bridge opened in 1902 and remains in service today . It is one of several bridges in Sullivan County that are on the National Register of Historic Places , including the Roebling Aqueduct and Pond Eddy Bridge . 
 = = Early history and construction ( 1764 – 1902 ) = = 
 In 1764 , the crossing from Skinners Falls to Milanville was the location of timber rafting for one of the most prominent families in the area , the Skinners . That year , Daniel Skinner took the first timber raft down the Delaware River . Completing this accomplishment , Skinner received the name " Lord High Admiral " , an honor that still stands to this date . The Skinners lived in a place christened as Milanville , but was known more locally as Skinners Falls . Upstream from the falls along the Delaware , another member of the Skinner family , Milton L. Skinner , operated a private ferry across the river between Pennsylvania and New York . Along with his brother , Volney , Milton Skinner also operated a local sawmill in Pennsylvania . For many years , these two <unk> remained prominent in the area . 
 The idea to construct a bridge in the area did not arise until the 20th Century . In 1900 and 1901 , politicians started to feel it was appropriate to build a bridge in the area . A firm , run by Milton L. Skinner , first opened in 1901 to help sell stock , construct the bridge , and then follow it by operating it for the general public . The firm , named the Milanville Bridge Company , was located in the community of Milanville on the Pennsylvania side . At the time the name of the bridge was referred to as the Milanville Bridge , but eventually , locals referred it as the " Skinners Falls Bridge " . The corporation received the charter from the state of Pennsylvania to construct the bridge in the later months of 1901 . The firm hired the American Bridge Company to construct the bridge . Construction did not get far , before an ice flood raised the river to the second story level of Milanville homes . This , along with local opposition , caused a short delay in construction . 
 Other than local opposition , the company owners for the nearby Narrowsburg – Darbytown Bridge and Cochecton – Damascus Bridge , complained about the competition of a bridge just 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) apart from each . The owners said that the bridge was unnecessary , and the issues eventually reached the state capital of New York , Albany . The attorney of the <unk> Bridge , John Anderson , went to the capital to fight the construction of the bridge . The most noticed objection to the companies was that the bridge under construction could only handle one lane of traffic , increasing the necessity of the other two bridges for people in a hurry . Objections decreased with the compromise , and the American Bridge Company finished construction of the bridge in November 1902 , the total cost being $ 14 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Private ownership ( 1902 – 1920s ) = = 
 After construction of the Skinners Falls – Milanville Bridge was completed in late 1902 , tolls were immediately charged along the one lane structure . However , unlike the other two bridges , the Skinners Falls – Milanville Bridge cost $ 0 @.@ 22 ( 1902 USD ) . A person traveling on foot did not have to pay to cross the structure . This decision was different compared to the other bridges , which made it separate . Another decision was that ministers were not tolled so they could better serve their communities . However , when one minister began to abuse the special privilege , he was charged $ 0 @.@ 05 for crossing . The tollhouse for collection was in Milanville and was run by the Dexter family . 
 Just two years after opening , a flood in March 1904 did serious damage to the structure . However , the owners hired the <unk> Bridge Company , run by the Perkins brothers . They charged $ 7 @,@ 000 ( 1904 USD ) to complete repairs of the bridge . With the reopening of the bridge , and along with the newly constructed Erie Railroad station , a new revitalization came to Skinners Falls and Milanville , including an acid company , creamery , and a dairy company , which helped raise income for the bridge using the $ 0 @.@ 22 toll . One company that could not make it is the Skinners ' timber rafting , which had been in business for over 140 years . In 1914 , J. Skinner was the new owner , but the company was devastated when one of their timber rafts collided with a Myers family @-@ owned ferryboat , killing four . The blame was placed on the ferry operator . However , along with the tragedy , the lack of riverside forests made it hard for timber rafting to prosper and in 1914 , they closed their doors . 
 = = Bridge Commission ownership ( 1920s – present ) = = 
 With the opening of the New York – Pennsylvania Joint Bridge Commission , a predecessor of the current Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission , in the 1920s to buy out these bridges from private ownership , the tolls along the bridges of the Delaware were beginning to come to an end . The Commission offered the Bridge Company an offer of $ 19 @,@ 542 @.@ 22 ( 1920s USD ) . The company took the offer and under new ownership , the tolls were eliminated . The bridge had more activity after the elimination of tolls and business continued to prosper . With the new owners , the bridge was kept under routine maintenance , and the bridge has continued to maintain a strong structure . Even with the floods from Hurricanes Connie and Diane of 1955 and the 1960s , the bridge survived with little to no structural damage . From May to October 1986 , the commission closed the bridge to do some renovations . The wooden deck was replaced , the entire bridge was painted , and new guide rails were constructed . The only thing is that the 3 ton ( 6000 lb ) weight limit remained after the revamping . On November 14 , 1988 , the bridge was added to the National Register of Historic Places . 
 On January 19 , 2010 , the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation shut down access to the Skinners Falls – Milanville Bridge when a truss member of the bridge was found to be defective . The bridge was supposed to undergo rehabilitation of the truss members later in the year for $ 200 @,@ 000 ( 2010 USD ) and a larger $ 8 million ( 2015 USD ) rehabilitation in 2015 . As of July 2013 , the bridge is in operation and open to vehicle traffic . 
 An inspection on December 11 , 2015 revealed that the bridge 's suspension wires were twisted and out of line , making the bridge unsafe to carry vehicles and the 114 @-@ year @-@ old bridge will be closed indefinitely , according to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation . 
 " This is not something that 's going just weeks or even months ; it 's going to be a while , " added DOT spokesman , James May . 
 Signs for detours are posted . 
 = 23 ( song ) = 
 " 23 " is a song by American record producer Mike Will Made It , featuring American recording artists Miley Cyrus , Wiz Khalifa and Juicy J ; it was released on September 10 , 2013 by Interscope Records . The song was written and produced by Mike Will Made It , with additional songwriting provided by Juicy J , Khalifa , Pierre Ramon Slaughter , and Rock City . " 23 " is set to a midtempo beat and lyrically references Air Jordan sneakers and recreational drug use . 
 " 23 " received generally mixed reviews from music critics , who were ambivalent towards its production and Cyrus ' rapping ability . It peaked at number 11 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 , and charted moderately internationally . An accompanying music video was filmed in Brooklyn on August 26 , 2013 , and premiered through Vevo on September 24 , 2013 . It received mixed reviews from critics , who were divided in their opinions of its 1990s and high school influences . Cyrus performed the song during the first leg of her ongoing Bangerz Tour . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 During the production of " 23 " , Mike Will Made It prepared a verse for himself to rap , which he originally planned to include alongside verses by Juicy J and Wiz Khalifa . However , after the latter two finished their respective recordings , Mike Will Made It decided that his contribution should be replaced by a woman . Mike Will Made It had recently finished producing Miley Cyrus ' track " We Can 't Stop " for her fourth studio album Bangerz ( 2013 ) when she first heard " 23 " and expressed interest in being included on the track . Mike Will Made It was initially hesitant of her suggestion , having met her earlier that day , although he " left her on there " after " she laid down the verse [ and ] killed it . " 
 " 23 " is a synth @-@ driven hip hop song set to a midtempo beat and contains elements of <unk> and is distinguished in Cyrus ' catalog as the first track in which she raps . In the chorus , Cyrus mentions recreational drug use , particularly in the line " I ’ m in the club high off <unk> with some shades on " . The track later transitions into the repeated hook " J 's on my feet " delivered by Juicy J , which references Air Jordan sneakers . Cyrus ' individual verse appears first , and is respectively followed by those by Khalifa and Juicy J. 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Mike Will Made It first previewed a 25 @-@ second snippet of " 23 " on August 7 , 2013 , and announced that the full recording would be released on August 26 ; however , its release was eventually delayed . Its original single cover was unveiled by September 3 ; it features a modified version of Michael Jordan 's Chicago Bulls basketball jersey , and was designed by <unk> of Atlanta , Georgia . The track was ultimately released on September 10 , and was serviced to rhythmic contemporary radio stations in the United States on September 17 . 
 " 23 " received generally mixed reviews from music critics , who were ambivalent towards its production and Cyrus ' rapping ability . In a favorable review , Mike Wass of Idolator was complimentary of Mike Will Made It 's " slick , multi @-@ layered production " and was indifferent towards Cyrus ' contributions . Sharing a similar sentiment , a writer for That Grape Juice stated that the artists " [ gave ] fans just what they want " , adding that they " [ went ] a long to make the jam the smash that it is . " Complex ranked " 23 " at number 23 on their list of the 50 best songs of 2013 , saying that Mike Will Made It knew that Miley would make this collaboration even better . However , in a more mixed review , Danielle Cheesman of MSN opined that " the song sounds like everything else Mike WiLL 's touched and turned to gold so it will be a smash but , much to Miley 's chagrin , it won 't be because of her " , and criticized Cyrus ' verses for " [ stealing 2 Chainz 's ] whole flow . " Tony <unk> from The Wrap also questioned her lyrical content , specifically criticizing the lyrics " I back it up , cause I don ’ t give a fuck " and " I ’ m MC Hammer fly . " Jordan Sargent from Spin called the track " far from Mike Will 's best work " and negatively compared Cyrus ' delivery to that of Lil Debbie . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , " 23 " entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 70 , and later peaked at number 11 . It additionally peaked at number 2 on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs component chart . 
 Elsewhere in North America , the track reached number 26 on the Canadian Hot 100 . In Europe , " 23 " respectively peaked at numbers 19 and 85 on the UK Singles Chart and the UK R & B Chart , both of which are organized by the Official Charts Company . The track respectively peaked at numbers 27 and 1 on the Ultratip component charts in Flanders and Wallonia , representing the fifty songs that failed to reach the flagship Ultratop chart in each Belgian region . It also peaked at number 31 on the French Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique , and number 44 on the Spanish Productores de Música de España . In Oceania , " 23 " reached number 39 on the Australian ARIA Charts and number 22 on the Official New Zealand Music Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 An accompanying music video for " 23 " was filmed in an undisclosed location in Brooklyn on August 26 , 2013 ; it was directed by Hannah Lux Davis . An advertisement for a casting call posted to Juicy J 's Instagram account requested " edgy , rebellious , sexy , [ and ] hood types " to appear as extras in the clip , and further stated that individuals " must wear [ their ] favorite pair of Jordans " . 
 The music video was premiered through Vevo on September 24 . The music video takes place in a high school ; it begins with the school principal leaving his office , which Mike Will Made It enters and begins playing " 23 " on a Beats Pill over the intercom . Interspersed throughout are scenes of Cyrus wearing a bikini similar to Michael Jordan 's Chicago Bulls basketball jersey ; she is frequently shown smoking in the bathroom and writing on its mirrors with red lipstick . Khalifa raps his verse in a chemistry lab , while Juicy J 's verse is rapped in a trophy room . A school @-@ wide pep rally later takes place , where Cyrus is gyrating against Mike Will Made It and notably wearing the foam finger used in her controversial performance at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards in August . 
 Critics were divided in their opinions for the music video . In a more favorable review , <unk> Rivera of Daily News stated that Cyrus is " undoubtedly the star of the video " and that the " ultimate cameo takes place when Cyrus brings back the infamous foam finger she waved and gyrated against during her MTV Video Music Awards performance " . Ray Rahman from Entertainment Weekly recognized the prominent 1990s influence throughout the clip , and felt it was " reminiscent " to the visuals for " Make ' Em Say Uhh ! " by Master P. In a more critical review , Carl Williott of Idolator opined that the music video was " sort of like a massive hip @-@ hop version of the " Smells Like Teen Spirit " video , with Air Jordans and Beats instead of anarchy symbols " , while Kayla Upadhyaya from The Michigan Daily called it a " pile of red and black vomit and a poorly edited mishmash of uninspired shots " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Cyrus performed the song during the first leg of her ongoing Bangerz Tour . During the second leg of the tour , " 23 " was replaced with The Beatles ' " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " . During the performance , Cyrus wore black @-@ and @-@ red Jordan 1s , a striped fishnet bikini and <unk> leather chaps with " Miley " scrawled down the side , through which she paid homage to Christina Aguilera 's " Dirrty " music video . Aguilera herself approved of the outfit and named Cyrus her dirrty girl successor , writing , " Cheers from one dirrty girl to the next @ <unk> ... wear em ' loud & proud , <unk> yes ! ! " on her Twitter account . Jane Stevenson of the Toronto Sun praised the performance and wrote that it saw Cyrus finally twerk it out with her dancers . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Son of God ( TV series ) = 
 Son of God ( also known as Jesus : The Complete Story and Jesus : The Real Story ) is an award @-@ winning British documentary series that chronicles the life of Jesus Christ using scientific and contemporary historical evidence . It was presented by Jeremy Bowen , and its first episode premiered in the United Kingdom on 1 April 2001 . The executive producer was Ruth Pitt and it was directed by Jean @-@ Claude Bragard — it took a total of 16 months to produce and cost GB £ 1 @.@ 5 million . A full symphonic score was composed by James Whitbourn . Son of God featured interviews with 21 historians and other Biblical experts , live action reenactments of the life of Jesus with Leron <unk> in the lead role , and computer @-@ generated images of what locations from Jesus 's time might have looked like . These images , created by design team Red Vision , were praised by critics and received an Outstanding Achievement Award at the 2001 Royal Television Society North Awards . 
 Son of God ran for a single series of three episodes , each of which focused on a different stage of Jesus 's life . The first episode , " The Real Man " , looked at the historical evidence for the existence of Jesus , and documented his life from his birth to his temptation . Episode two , " The Mission " , discussed how Jesus became popular among Jews and Greeks , and why the Pharisees of the area might have seen him as a threat . " The Final Hours " , the third and final episode of Son of God , looked at Jesus 's crucifixion , and presented some ideas as to how the traditional views of the crucifixion may conflict with how it really occurred . The episode concluded with the construction of a computer @-@ generated animation of how Jesus may have appeared . 
 Critical reaction to the series was mixed . While some reviewers praised the programme for being worthy of its publicity by focusing on history rather than spirituality , others remarked that it was dumbed down and went off on strange tangents . The reliability of the facial reconstruction was also questioned . Son of God first aired in the UK on BBC One during April 2001 , where it received a viewership of six million and an audience share of 25 % . In the United States , the series was shown on the Discovery Channel under the name Jesus : The Complete Story as a single three @-@ hour programme , two weeks after its UK broadcast . The show was also licensed to countries including France , Denmark and New Zealand . 
 = = Production = = 
 Son of God was devised in 1999 , and was produced and joint @-@ sponsored by BBC Manchester and the Discovery Channel in association with France 3 and Jerusalem Productions . The show was directed by Jean @-@ Claude Bragard — whose previous BBC work had included Kicking & Screaming – A History of Football and the documentary series Panorama — and the executive producer was Ruth Pitt , who had worked on documentaries such as 42 Up and Channel 4 's The State of Marriage . During its promotion , Pitt described Son of God as " the most complete biography of Jesus that [ had ] ever been done " . 
 Jeremy Bowen , a former Middle East correspondent for BBC News , was chosen to present the programme for its UK broadcast . Despite not being religious , he was drawn to the programme for its use of scientific and historical information . As well as presenting , Bowen also narrated and scripted large portions of the series . He stated that he brought a degree of scepticism to the show : before the first episode aired , he admitted that he did not think that you could " corroborate anything that was in the Gospels " . In the US version of Son of God , which was broadcast on the Discovery Channel and retitled Jesus : The Complete Story , the footage of Bowen was edited out and his narration was redubbed by American actor Avery Brooks . It was also released in this format under the name Jesus : The Real Story , with narration from Tom Hodgkins . 
 Son of God took 16 months to produce , and cost approximately £ 1 @.@ 5 million . It was featured as part of a £ 253 million season of new television programming on the BBC during the spring of 2001 . British conductor James Whitbourn was commissioned to write a complete symphonic score for the series , which was performed by the BBC Philharmonic . The completed programme featured more than an hour and a half of Whitbourn 's music . Whitbourn subsequently used the seminal themes from his orchestral score as the basis of his popular choral work , Son of God Mass , for soprano saxophone , choir and organ . Computer graphic images were created by design group Red Vision , who employed techniques similar to ones used in the 2000 BBC series Walking with Dinosaurs . Speaking in September 2001 , a spokesman for Red Vision stated that their involvement in Son of God had been " incredibly successful " for them . 
 Promotional campaigns for both the British and American broadcasts of the series focused on the technology and science being used in the programme , and the special effects that Red Vision had created . In particular , a facial reconstruction during the final episode showing what Jesus might have looked like garnered significant media attention . In the lead @-@ up to episode one , several newspapers , including The Daily Mail and The Guardian , ran stories speculating whether the computer @-@ generated image could show the true face of Jesus . British television listings magazine Radio Times featured the reconstructed face on the cover of its 31 March issue under the headline " Is This the Face of Jesus ? " . This cover and its headline received criticism from some commentators for being sensationalist and misleading . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Son of God consists of a single series of three episodes . Each episode lasts approximately 50 minutes and documents a different stage of Jesus 's life . The episodes take the format of Bowen visiting significant locations from the life of Jesus , talking head interviews with 21 historians and Biblical experts , and reenactments of Jesus 's life featuring Israeli actor <unk> <unk> . Locations from Jesus 's time — such as Caesarea , <unk> and <unk> — were recreated by archaeologists using evidence from buildings and street plans , and were then digitised into computer graphics by Red Vision . 
 = = = " The Real Man " = = = 
 The first episode of Son of God , " The Real Man " , documents Jesus 's life up to his temptation , and details the historical evidence for his existence . Bowen visits Jerusalem , where he calls Jesus 's death " one of the best attested facts in ancient history " . He cites the Romano @-@ Jewish historian Josephus as one of 80 sources that confirms that Jesus existed and that describes him as " a wise man who did surprising feats , ... won over followers from among Jews and Greeks , ... was accused by the Jewish leaders , [ and ] was condemned to be crucified by Pilate " . Bowen interviews James H. Charlesworth from Princeton University about the discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls in 1947 , then travels to Bethlehem to visit the Church of the Nativity , a structure built over a series of first @-@ century caves and grottos . While there , he speculates that Jesus may have been born in a cave rather than an inn , the more traditional image . Joe <unk> , an archaeologist from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem confirms this , saying that the Greek word " <unk> " is usually translated into English as " upper room " rather than " inn " . 
 " The Real Man " also looks at the story of the Star of Bethlehem , which Bowen states would have been an " astrological " rather than " astronomical " phenomenon . According to astronomer Michael <unk> , astrologers from around the time of Herod the Great would have believed that the constellation Aries symbolised his kingdom and the lands that he controlled – during 6 BC , the year that some scholars theorise that Jesus was born , a rare planetary alignment meant that Jupiter , Saturn , the Sun and the Moon would have all appeared in this constellation . Bowen next looks at how Jesus would have been born out of wedlock : Mark Goodacre , a historian from the University of Birmingham , asserts that Jewish , pagan and Christian sources all confirm that Jesus was born out of wedlock , as do both the Gospels of Matthew and Luke . All four canonical gospels agree that the city of Nazareth was where Jesus grew up . Hanan Eshel , an archaeologist from Bar @-@ Ilan University , proposes that Jesus 's interest in religion and politics might have been sparked off during a family visit to the Temple Mount , the " headquarters of the Jewish faith " . The episode ends with Bowen spending the night alone at the Mount of Temptation just above Jericho , where Jesus is traditionally believed to have spent 40 days and nights being tempted by the devil . 
 = = = " The Mission " = = = 
 Episode two , " The Mission " , discusses how Jesus became popular and why the Pharisees might have seen him as a potential threat . Bowen visits the Dome of the Rock , the site of Jerusalem 's temple , and discusses how Jesus went to the Sea of Galilee to recruit his disciples . He speaks with <unk> Cohen , a conservator of antiquities who led the excavation of the Sea of Galilee Boat , who suggests that the boat may have been similar to one owned by Saint Peter . Bowen then travels to Capernaum and visits the House of Peter , where he speaks to Mordechai <unk> , an archaeologist from the Israel Antiquities Authority . <unk> states that first @-@ century Greek " graffiti " in the house suggests that the house belonged to Peter . Bowen visits the tomb of a first @-@ century scholar and miracle @-@ worker named Hanina ben Dosa , and contrasts Hanina 's life with that of Jesus 's : for example , while Jesus was executed , Hanina was not . 
 " The Mission " then looks at how Jesus may have been viewed by the religious leaders of the time . The canonical gospels report over one hundred cases of Jesus healing or performing exorcisms , and " making the unclean clean again " . Jesus told lepers to go up to the Temple Mount , where they were usually excluded , and claimed that he could forgive sins without going through the ordinary channels . Jesus met and ate with sinners , the disabled and prostitutes , and fulfilled Old Testament prophecy by riding into the Temple Mount through the Golden Gate on a donkey at Passover . Bowen concludes that all these reasons would have meant that the Pharisees of the time would have seen him as threatening . 
 = = = " The Final Hours " = = = 
 " The Final Hours " , the third episode of Son of God , details Jesus 's last days alive . Bowen claims that the Last Supper would have been held in the guest room of a " well @-@ to @-@ do " house in Jerusalem . Writings by Josephus suggest that the Last Supper took place in a triclinium . As guest of honour , Jesus would have been at the end of the table with John the Apostle at his side , rather than at the centre , as proposed by more familiar depictions such as Leonardo da Vinci 's The Last Supper . Bowen then looks at whether or not Jesus could have sweated blood at Gethsemane . Leaving the Middle East for the first time , he travels to New York City and meets with Frederick Zugibe , a forensic pathologist at Columbia University . Zugibe states that Jesus may have been suffering from <unk> , a medical condition brought about by stress from knowing that one is about to die . He also says that he has seen similar symptoms in sailors and in men given death sentences . Zugibe experiments on volunteers in Rutland County , Vermont , by measuring their blood pressure while they are strapped to crosses with their arms outstretched and level with their shoulders . He concludes that the traditional view of Jesus 's crucifixion , with the nails of the cross driven through his hands rather than wrists , may have been possible if his feet were supported . The 1968 discovery of the skeleton of <unk> , a first @-@ century man who was put to death by crucifixion , also supports this theory . Next , Bowen questions whether the disciple Judas Iscariot truly did double @-@ cross Jesus . William Klassen , an historian at École <unk> in Jerusalem , theorises that the Greek word " <unk> " was mistranslated , and that Judas simply " handed over " Jesus to the Romans , rather than betrayed him . 
 " The Final Hours " ends with a facial reconstruction suggesting what Jesus may have looked like . Using one of three first @-@ century Jewish skulls from a forensic science department in Israel , a clay model is created through forensic anthropology by Richard Neave , a retired medical artist from the Unit of Art in Medicine at Manchester University . The face that Neave constructs suggests that Jesus would have had a broad face and large nose , and differs significantly from his traditional depictions in renaissance art . Additional information about Jesus 's skin colour and hair is provided by Goodacre . Using third @-@ century images from the Dura @-@ Europos synagogue — the earliest pictures of Jewish people — Goodacre proposes that Jesus 's skin would have been " olive @-@ coloured " and " swarthy " , and much darker than his traditional Western image . He also suggests that Jesus would have had short , curly hair and a short cropped beard . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical reaction to Son of God was mixed . The series received praise from commentators such as Andrew Billen of the New Statesman for focussing on " history against spirituality every time " . However , Billen also contrasted the show with The Lives of Jesus , a similar series from December 1996 , remarking that it was flash and filmic , whereas The Lives of Jesus had been far more discreet . BBC News 's Michael Osborn acclaimed the series , saying that it was " worthy of all [ its ] publicity " and that Bowen was well placed in his role as presenter . The graphics created by Red Vision were well received : The Daily Record described the computer imagery as stunning , while Gareth McLean of The Guardian noted that the series was " visually , ... quite a treat " . McLean also commented that the programme itself was rather interesting , but that it contained " slightly odd , slightly irrelevant diversions " . 
 A review of a more critical nature came from Catherine Bennett , also writing for The Guardian , who questioned the facial reconstruction from the third episode and suggested that it was dismissive to imply that it was how Jesus truly appeared . Speaking about the study , Bennett remarked : " We must hope that ... future BBC controllers do not dig up , say , Robin Cook 's skull , drape it in Plasticine , and ask : ' Is this the real face of Tony Blair ? ' " . John Preston , writing for The Sunday Telegraph , also questioned the reliability of the reconstruction , and branded the series as dumbed down . The programme received criticism from theological scholars : following the broadcast of the first episode , Tom Wright , one of two consultants used during production of the series , felt that Jesus 's mission had been misrepresented by the show . Wright claimed that the BBC had elected to portray Jesus simply as " a politically correct social worker " . 
 Reviews of the American broadcast of Jesus : The Complete Story were also mixed . While some reviewers described the show as fascinating and reverent , others were more negative . Writing for The Orlando Sentinel , Hal Boedeker agreed that the computer imaging was spectacular , but that the rest of the show was a " hodgepodge " that " [ went ] off on some strange tangents " . Eric Mink of The Daily News stated that the show relied too heavily on exaggeration and that it was " sloppy with facts " , while Ann Rodgers @-@ Melnick of The Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette described it as " uneven but vivid " . 
 = = = Ratings and awards = = = 
 The first episode of Son of God shown in the UK gained six million viewers and an audience share of 25 % , which was considered high for a religious documentary . During its American broadcast on the Discovery Channel , the series was watched by 12 million . It was repeated in the US during March the following year , and gained a figure of 1 @.@ 5 million viewers per episode . The series was nominated for two awards , both for the computer @-@ generated images created by graphics team Red Vision : it was first nominated at the 2001 LEAF Awards , then won an Outstanding Achievement award at the 2001 Royal Television Society North Awards . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Son of God was distributed by the BBC , who broadcast the show on BBC One . It premiered in the UK at 9 : 10 p.m. on 1 April 2001 , and ran for a single series of three episodes , with each episode being shown weekly on Sunday nights . As well as being shown in the UK , Son of God was also licensed to New Zealand and seven European territories , including France and Denmark . In the United States , the show was aired by the Discovery Channel under the name Jesus : The Complete Story , as a single three @-@ hour special at 8 p.m. on 15 April , two weeks after its UK broadcast . It was also repeated in the US on Christmas Day 2002 and 2003 . 
 In March 2002 , a year after the show was first broadcast in the UK , an accompanying book written by Angela <unk> was released . <unk> 's book , also titled Son of God , was a tie @-@ in to the documentary series , and featured an introduction from Bowen . As of 23 December 2011 , Son of God is not available on DVD in the UK , nor is it available on BBC iPlayer , the BBC 's on demand service . A VHS box set of Jesus : The Complete Story , produced by Warner Home Video , was released in the United States on 15 May 2001 . The set was rereleased on Region 1 DVD on 31 August 2004 . 
 = = Moses = = 
 Following the success of Son of God , a similar , single @-@ episode documentary was commissioned by the BBC in July 2001 . The programme , entitled Moses , documented the life of Moses is a style akin to Son of God — it reunited Bowen and Bragard , who presented and directed @-@ produced the show respectively . Like Son of God , Moses featured live @-@ action reenactments , computer @-@ generated images of the period and interviews with historians and scholars . It was first broadcast in the UK during December 2002 . 
 = M @-@ 63 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 63 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan that runs from M @-@ 139 at Scottdale through the cities of Benton Harbor and St. Joseph to Interstate 196 / US Highway 31 ( I @-@ 196 / US 31 ) at exit 7 just outside Hagar Shores . The trunkline runs through residential areas south of St. Joseph and through the central business districts of the twin cities . Further north , M @-@ 63 runs along the Lake Michigan shoreline . 
 All of M @-@ 63 's routing was part of US 33 before that highway 's truncation south of Niles in 1986 . A previous designation of M @-@ 63 was used farther north in Lake and Osceola counties from 1919 until 1961 . Since the current designation was created , the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) has worked on reconfiguring parts of the roadway in the early part of the 21st century . The bridge M @-@ 63 uses to cross the St. Joseph River , the Blossomland Bridge , has been identified as an historic structure using a rare design . The bridge itself dates back to the late 1940s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 63 begins at the intersection of Niles , Scottdale and Miners roads southwest of St. Joseph in Royalton Township . M @-@ 139 runs on Niles Road northwest from Berrien Springs to this point and on Scottdale Road north of the intersection . M @-@ 63 follows Miners Road west and then Niles Road northwest of the junction , parallel to the St. Joseph River through residential areas on the outskirts of the twin cities . The highway meets Interstate 94 ( I @-@ 94 ) at the latter 's exit 27 and continues through St. Joseph Township to the city of St. Joseph . In the city , after Washington Avenue , Niles Road becomes Niles Avenue and turns north . As part of its maintenance duties , the MDOT tracks traffic volumes on the state highways in a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a calculation of the average traffic level for any day of a year . The roadway segment along Niles Avenue north of the Napier Avenue intersection in 2009 had the highest traffic levels along all of M @-@ 63 at 22 @,@ 263 vehicles . 
 At Main Street , Niles Avenue ends , and M @-@ 63 joins Business Loop I @-@ 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) on Main Street into and through the downtown business district . The two highways continue together running concurrently to Ship and Port streets . These two streets form a one @-@ way pair running east to carry BL I @-@ 94 to and from a separate bridge over the St. Joseph River . M @-@ 63 continues along Main Street across the river into Benton Harbor , Michigan where it follows the Lake Michigan shoreline along a short expressway segment . The trunkline exits Benton Harbor near the headquarters of the Whirlpool Corporation . North of town , the highway provides access to many lakeshore properties north of Benton Harbor at it continues northeasterly along the shoreline to the community of Lake Michigan Beach . When the highway meets Hagar Shore Road , M @-@ 63 turns east along that roadway to an interchange with I @-@ 196 / US 31 . The shoreline roadway continues northeast as A @-@ 2 ( Blue Star Highway ) while M @-@ 63 terminates at an interchange with I @-@ 196 / US 31 . This northernmost segment of the highway had the lowest AADT measurement in 2009 when calculated by MDOT at 2 @,@ 855 vehicles . 
 Various highways in the United States are listed as a part of the National Highway System ( NHS ) , a system of roads important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . M @-@ 63 has been listed as a part of the NHS from its southern terminus to the northern junction with BL I @-@ 94 in St. Joseph . As the closest state highway to Lake Michigan in the area , M @-@ 63 from the southern junction with BL I @-@ 94 to its northern terminus has been used as a part of the Lake Michigan Circle Tour , a tourist route that circles Lake Michigan . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous designation = = = 
 M @-@ 63 originally ran from Peacock in Lake County west through Luther to M @-@ 13 ( later US 131 ) in Osceola County on July 1 , 1919 . This highway was extended in 1930 along US 131 to Tustin and then to a terminus with M @-@ 66 in Marion . At the same time , M @-@ 37 was extended north from Baldwin to meet M @-@ 63 east of Peacock . This eastern extension was truncated in 1932 when it was redesignated as part of M @-@ 61 . A short connector roadway , M @-@ 179 , was designated in 1935 between M @-@ 63 and US 131 , forming a small triangle of highways . The western end was shortened in 1939 so that M @-@ 63 ended at M @-@ 37 instead of continuing west to Peacock . The M @-@ 179 designation was decommissioned in 1959 or 1960 , removing that short highway from the state trunkline highway system . M @-@ 63 was decommissioned in 1961 when the roadway was transferred back to local control . 
 = = = Current designation = = = 
 The current designation of M @-@ 63 was created in 1986 . Before the designation , US 33 ran north into Michigan south of Niles . From there it followed US 31 north to Scottdale and ran alone to St. Joseph and Benton Harbor . When US 33 was truncated back to Niles , M @-@ 63 was commissioned in its place along the route it now follows . 
 The expressway portion of M @-@ 63 is a relic of a now revised plan of a freeway corridor through the St. Joseph – Benton Harbor area . The highway was significantly reconfigured in 2000 – 2002 , with the overpass over the industrial access road to Whirlpool 's warehouse in Benton Harbor and a rail line removed and rebuilt in late 2000 through early 2001 , and one of the two grade @-@ separated interchanges , at Klock Road , demolished and downgraded to an at @-@ grade intersection in 2002 . Today , there are only two overpasses over smaller roads existing on this stretch of expressway . 
 = = = Blossomland Bridge = = = 
 The Blossomland Bridge over the St. Joseph River is eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places . The span is a Scherzer rolling @-@ lift bascule , a type of moveable bridge . The bridge was built as part of a 1940s plan to relocate US 31 through St. Joseph and Benton Harbor . Those plans were delayed by World War II . The bridge was completed in late 1948 using the rare design prepared by a firm from Chicago that specialized in bascule bridges . The state paid a total of $ 1 @.@ 3 million for what was called " the largest bridge ever built under the auspices of the State Highway Department " . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Berrien County . 
 = 11th Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 11th Battalion was an Australian Army battalion that was among the first infantry units raised during World War I for the First Australian Imperial Force . It was the first battalion recruited in Western Australia , and following a brief training period in Perth , the battalion sailed to Egypt where it undertook four months of intensive training . In April 1915 it took part in the invasion of the Gallipoli Peninsula , landing at Anzac Cove . In August 1915 the battalion was in action in the Battle of Lone Pine . Following the withdrawal from Gallipoli , the battalion returned to Egypt where it was split to help form the 51st Battalion . In March 1916 , the battalion was deployed to the Western Front in France and Belgium where it took part in trench warfare until the end of the war in November 1918 . 
 The battalion was disbanded in 1919 , but since 1921 has been re @-@ activated and merged several times as a reserve unit , initially as the 11th Battalion ( City of Perth Regiment ) , which fought a brief campaign against the Japanese on New Britain during World War II . Other units that have maintained the traditions of the original 11th Battalion include the 11th / 44th Battalion ( City of Perth Regiment ) , ' A ' ( City of Perth ) Company , 1st Battalion , Royal Western Australia Regiment and the current 11th / 28th Battalion , Royal Western Australia Regiment . 
 = = World War I = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The 11th Battalion was formed on 17 August 1914 , less than two weeks after the declaration of war on 4 August , and was among the first infantry units raised during World War I for the all @-@ volunteer First Australian Imperial Force . Along with the 9th , 10th and 12th Battalions , it formed Colonel Ewen Sinclair @-@ Maclagan 's 3rd Brigade , which was assigned to the 1st Division . The first battalion raised in Western Australia , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel James Lyon @-@ Johnston , the 11th concentrated at Blackboy Hill , Western Australia . Drawing personnel from around the state with the majority coming from Perth and the goldfields , recruits came from all elements of society , with the majority being former labourers and agricultural workers or miners . Seventy @-@ three percent of original enlistments were Australian born , with the remaining recruits being mainly English @-@ born with smaller numbers coming from other parts of the British Isles . By 24 September it had reached its authorised strength of 1 @,@ 023 officers and other ranks . On formation , the battalion consisted of eight rifle companies , designated ' A ' to ' H ' , and a headquarters company with signals , transport , medical and machine @-@ gun sections . 
 The majority of the battalion 's non @-@ commissioned officers were long @-@ serving Citizens Forces soldiers or Regular personnel . Some had previously fought in South Africa during the Boer War and others had previously served in the British Army . Rudimentary training was undertaken at <unk> , Western Australia , and at the end of October it sailed from Fremantle on the SS Ascanius and SS Medic . Originally bound for the United Kingdom , where they were to complete training , after stopovers in the Cocos Islands and Colombo , their orders were changed due to concerns about overcrowding in training camps in the United Kingdom and at the start of December , the battalion arrived at Mena Camp in Cairo , Egypt . There , the battalion 's eight companies were reorganised into the four that existed under the British Army establishment and further training was undertaken . The battalion remained in Egypt until early March 1915 when it sailed on SS Suffolk and SS Nizam from Alexandria to the island of Lemnos in the Aegean sea , in preparation for the Landing at Anzac Cove . 
 = = = Gallipoli = = = 
 = = = = Landing at Anzac Cove = = = = 
 On 24 April 1915 , the battalion disembarked from Suffolk and boarded HMS London , which was bound for Gallipoli in the Dardanelles . At 4 : 30 on the morning of 25 April , ' A ' and ' C ' Companies of the battalion landed at Anzac Cove around Ari Burnu Knoll , a mile south of Fisherman 's Hut , on the left flank of the first wave . Under heavy machine @-@ gun and rifle fire , the battalion stormed the cliffs , driving the Turks back . However , the battalion became disorganised during the landing and mixed with other units . Small sections of the battalion were engaged in firefights all along the Australian front . Major Edmund Drake @-@ Brockman , one of the battalion 's senior officers , tried to sort the scattered men into their battalions : 9th on the right , 10th in the middle and 11th on the left . Meanwhile , the second half of the battalion landed further north of the first wave , directly under heavy machine @-@ gun fire from Turks fully prepared and alerted by the first wave . 
 Over the next few days , the battalion dug in on the first and second ridges under heavy fire from the Turks . Casualties were heavy , but a defensive line was established . On the 30th , the battalion was withdrawn and moved into reserve on the beach . The next day , it reoccupied its section of the front . At this stage , the battalion was 450 @-@ strong . By 1 May , 30 officers and 940 other ranks from the battalion had landed . 
 = = = = Raid on Gaba Tepe = = = = 
 On 4 May 1915 , a party of 100 men from the battalion , led by Captain Raymond Leane and a detail of engineers , launched an unsuccessful attack on a Turkish fort at Gaba Tepe , which was being used to observe artillery fire onto Australian positions around Anzac Cove . The Turks opened heavy fire on the party which was forced to withdraw . The Australians lost four killed , including an officer , and 19 others were wounded . The raid was the AIF 's first of the war . At this point , the battalion estimated that it had suffered 38 killed , 200 wounded and 197 missing . On 15 May , the battalion received 244 reinforcements , bringing its total strength to 23 officers and 723 other ranks . 
 In the early morning on 19 May , Turkish forces launched an attack against the left flank of the Australian lines , which developed into a major battle along the whole Australian front . The attack was repulsed with heavy losses . The 11th Battalion suffered nine killed and eight wounded , mainly from shrapnel . One Turkish officer and five soldiers surrendered . On 21 May , a truce was declared and a burial party from the 12th Battalion was sent out . However , it was fired at by the Turks and as a result burial parties were discontinued . A similar truce was declared on 24 May . A line was drawn halfway between the two lines and each side sent out parties to bury the dead and collect equipment . 
 = = = = Lone Pine = = = = 
 On 27 July 1915 , after two weeks in reserve , the battalion relieved the 12th Battalion at Tasmanian Post , on the right on the Australian front line . On 31 July , a party of around 200 men led by Leane were ordered to capture a section of Turkish trenches in front of the battalion 's position . After engineers detonated three mines prepared near Turkish communications trenches , the storming party captured the Turkish trench following a bayonet charge , with the loss of one officer and 36 other ranks killed . Seventy @-@ three other members of the battalion were wounded during the attack , including Leane , who was mentioned in dispatches . Turkish casualties were estimated by the battalion to be 60 killed . 
 On 6 August , the battalion held off a fierce Turkish counterattack on the trench , which became known as " Leane 's Trench " during the Battle of Lone Pine . Heavy casualties were sustained on both sides . The battalion suffered 41 killed , 94 wounded and 19 missing . By the end of the month , the 11th Battalion 's strength , despite having received six batches of reinforcements , had fallen to just over 500 men , approximately half its authorised strength . The following month , command of the battalion passed to Leane when Lyon @-@ Johnston took over as brigade commander . As the health of the men deteriorated , the battalion 's strength fell further to just over 300 . The arrival of winter in October brought heavy rain and even harsher conditions . 
 = = = = Withdrawal = = = = 
 In November , the battalion supported the 5th Light Horse around " Chatham Post " until it was withdrawn , with the 9th Battalion , from Anzac Cove . The withdrawal had been planned for the 14th , but due to bad weather this was delayed until the night of the 16 / 17 November 1915 . From Anzac Cove , it sailed to Lemnos where it recuperated at <unk> Camp , following seven months in the trenches . The battalion 's war diary records particularly bad weather on Lemnos during this period , noting " Mudros seems a most unsuitable place to send troops for a rest " . During this rest period , the battalion reported its first and only case of diphtheria , following which the whole brigade was quarantined . On 17 December , the battalion 's last casualty of the campaign , a soldier named Private Hayes , died from meningitis . The battalion lost a total of 353 men killed during the campaign . 
 = = = Western Front = = = 
 In early 1916 , the battalion sailed to Alexandria on the Empress of Britain . From Alexandria , it travelled by train to bivouac at Tall al Kabir . At this time , the battalion received 367 reinforcements from Australia before undertaking defensive duties around Gebel <unk> , guarding the Suez Canal . In February , the AIF was re @-@ organised and expanded . This saw the veteran battalions split to provide cadres for new battalions and as a part of this process , the 15th Battalion provided personnel to the 51st Battalion , by transferring the even numbered sections to the new battalion . At this time , the battalion received four Lewis Guns for organic direct fire support . 
 On 30 March 1916 , as the AIF 's infantry divisions were transferred to Europe , the battalion sailed from Alexandria aboard the HMT Corsican . It arrived at Marseilles , France , on 5 April and then moved by train to <unk> where it was billeted until the 19th when it moved to Sailly , where it commemorated Anzac Day on 25 April . In mid @-@ May , after a period of acclimatisation and training to prepare them for the European battlefield , the 11th Battalion moved up to the front line around <unk> in the Fleurbaix sector , with a strength of 27 officers and 929 other ranks . A further draft of reinforcements , totalling 69 men all ranks , arrived on 25 May , and on 30 May the battalion had its first experience of combat on the Western Front . Late that evening , German artillery bombarded the Allied line around the <unk> salient , before infantry launched a raid on the 11th Battalion 's trenches . In the fighting that followed the 11th Battalion lost four men captured , 37 killed and 70 wounded . 
 = = = = Pozières and Mouquet Farm = = = = 
 Throughout June , the 11th Battalion was placed in support of the front as it was brought back up to strength . At this time , the battalion 's organic fire support was increased by the addition of two extra Lewis Guns . The following month , they moved to the Somme and were committed to the fighting around Pozières . After arriving at Albert on 19 July amidst a gas attack , the battalion spent the next couple of days preparing to attack , working to improve trenches and cache stores , during which they were subjected to heavy artillery bombardment . The attack was put in just before midnight on 23 July and was a costly success . Amidst heavy casualties , the 11th Battalion took the forward German trenches and amidst the confusion of the fighting advanced beyond their limit of exploitation , entering Pozières and moving beyond where they became embroiled in close quarters fighting . After capturing five artillery pieces , the battalion 's officers and non @-@ commissioned officers eventually managed to regain control of the advance and the battalion was brought back into a defensive line along their first objective . At dawn , patrols from the battalion entered the village again and cleared out the cellars beneath the battered remains of the village 's buildings , capturing over 40 prisoners . 
 During the night of 24 / 25 July , the Australians attacked again , but after establishing a new defensive line , the 11th was forced to withdraw after suffering heavily from both friendly and enemy shelling . In the morning of 25 July , further casualties were sustained by German artillery . German infantry then launched a counterattack on the battalion 's right , but the Australians managed to hold their ground . They remained in the line throughout the day , before the 19th Battalion arrived as part of the 5th Brigade 's relief of the 3rd Brigade . Having lost 19 officers and 512 other ranks killed , wounded or missing , the battalion had suffered the most of all the 3rd Brigade 's battalions and was moved back to <unk> to be rebuilt . 
 After re @-@ organising , in mid @-@ August the 11th Battalion moved to La Boisselle where they were placed into brigade reserve . Just before dawn on 21 August , about 200 men from the 11th took part in an attack around Mouquet Farm ; casualties amounted to 20 killed and 40 wounded and afterwards the battalion was moved to Belgium . The 11th Battalion spent the remainder of 1916 in the Ypres sector , in Flanders , but was moved back to the Somme at the end of the year as the worst winter in 40 years descended on the front . 
 = = = = Louverval = = = = 
 In early 1917 , the Germans fell back towards the Hindenburg Line in an effort to shorten their lines and move into prepared positions . As the Allies pursued the withdrawing Germans , in late February the 11th Battalion captured Le Barque , conducting mopping @-@ up operations before advancing to <unk> where they fought a minor engagement before being relieved by the 3rd Battalion , having lost 12 killed and 30 wounded during the fighting and a further 10 men killed and 13 wounded by artillery . Sickness also took a heavy toll during this time due to the bad weather . In March , Lieutenant Colonel Rupert Rafferty took over as commanding officer and the following month , as the Allied line was pushed further forward towards the Hindenburg Line , the 11th Battalion played a supporting role during the 3rd Brigade 's attack around Boursies , before occupying the front around the village of Louverval . On 15 April 1917 , during the Battle of Lagnicourt , Lieutenant Charles Pope , of ' A ' Company , was in command of an important picket post on the right of the battalion 's positions outside Louverval , with orders to " hold the position at all costs " . The Germans attacked the position with overwhelming numbers and surrounded the post . Having used up their ammunition , the remainder of the post charged with fixed bayonets into the surrounding German positions . Pope 's body was later found with those of his men , having killed 80 Germans . Pope was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross , Australia 's highest award for gallantry in the face of the enemy . 
 = = = = Bullecourt and the Third Battle of Ypres = = = = 
 In early May , the 11th Battalion moved to <unk> , where they occupied a recently captured portion of the German line . A couple of days later , during the Second Battle of Bullecourt , their position was attacked by German " shock troops " . In response to the attack , supporting artillery was called down , and the attack repulsed . The Germans laid down a heavy bombardment in retaliation . An attack was ordered , but the order was rescinded when the senior officer in the forward trench , Major Aubrey Darnell , expressed concerns about the state of the soldiers in the assault wave . The Germans then put in another attack , which was once again turned back , before the 11th launched a limited counterattack and regained the ground that had been lost . The battalion , having lost 68 men killed , two captured and 140 wounded , was down to a strength of just over 400 men . They were relieved and then moved back to Bapaume , where they received a draft of over 100 reinforcements . 
 Over the next couple of months , the battalion was rebuilt , reaching a strength of 44 officers and 1 @,@ 002 other ranks by late August . The following month they were committed to the Third Battle of Ypres . Their first attack came around Glencorse Wood on 20 September , during which the 11th Battalion lost 46 killed and 100 wounded , before moving to <unk> Ridge in early October . Another move saw them transferred to <unk> Ridge , where they conducted a raid on German positions around Celtic Wood on 6 / 7 October in concert with the 12th Battalion . The following day , the 11th Battalion moved to a position on " Anzac Ridge " , before later moving to Zonnebeke at the end of the month where they suffered heavy casualties from German artillery . Throughout November and the first part of December , the battalion remained out of the line , resting around Bologne , before returning to the front around Messines in late December , remaining there over New Years . The battalion 's strength during this time was 32 officers and 687 other ranks . 
 = = = = German Spring Offensive and the final Hundred Days = = = = 
 In early 1918 , after the capitulation of Tsarist Russia the Germans , having moved the bulk of their forces to the Western Front , launched the Spring Offensive , striking against the British forces in the Somme . The initial onslaught pushed the Allied forces back and the Australian divisions , which had been merged into the Australian Corps , were thrown into the line in an effort to stem the tide . In early March , the 11th Battalion moved to the Hollebeke sector , where they were subjected to gas attacks before being sent south to Amiens at the start of April , joining the rest of the 1st Division in defence of Hazebrouck in the middle of the month . For the next couple of months the battalion rotated through the line in a defensive role as the German offensive was blunted . In June , as the Allies sought to regain some of the initiative , they undertook a series of Peaceful Penetration raids . On 2 June , the 11th Battalion attacked Mont de Merris , which resulted in the capture of a large amount of German equipment and over 200 prisoners for the loss of 16 men killed and 74 wounded . A lesser attack was launched on the German trenches opposite the battalion on 22 June . Around this time , a small group of US soldiers was attached to the 11th Battalion to gain experience . The following month , the battalion captured <unk> Farm before supporting the 10th Battalion 's successful attack on Merris . 
 On 8 August , the Allies launched their own offensive , known as the Hundred Days Offensive , around Amiens . The 11th Battalion did not take part in the opening phase of the offensive , moving to Hamel and establishing themselves in a defensive position around <unk> . On 10 August , the battalion was committed to a strong attack around Lihons ; although successful , the attack lasted three days and resulted in heavy casualties , including 58 killed and 140 wounded . On the night of 12 / 13 August , the 11th was withdrawn to the support line just behind the front . Later , they were moved to Vaire and then Cerisy , before supporting the 9th and 12th Battalions around <unk> and Proyart on 23 August and then around Chuignes and Cappy two days later , where further losses were experienced . The 11th Battalion 's final attack came against the Hindenburg Outpost Line on 18 September when they launched a three @-@ company attack around <unk> Farm and <unk> Copse near <unk> . Despite being severely understrength – each company had an average strength of just 76 men – they advanced over 3 @,@ 000 yards ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) and took over 120 prisoners and large quantities of German equipment , for the loss of 18 men killed . Further casualties came on 24 October when German aircraft attacked the battalion headquarters , killing a number of officers , including Darnell , who was the acting commanding officer . The heavy casualties that the Australians had suffered during the final year of the war , and the decrease in volunteers arriving from Australia , meant that the battalion was desperately understrength . In October , they were withdrawn from the line for rest and reorganisation , at the insistence of the Australian prime minister , Billy Hughes . At this time , the battalion was reorganised into a two @-@ company structure . In early November , the battalion prepared to return to the front around St. Quentin , but before they could return to the fighting , an armistice came into effect , bringing the war to an end . 
 By the end of the war , a total of over 9 @,@ 000 men had served in the 11th Battalion , of which 1 @,@ 115 were killed and 2 @,@ 424 wounded . Members of the battalion received the following decorations for their service during the war : one VC , one CB , two CMGs , seven DSOs , one OBE , 30 MCs and one bar , 25 DCMs with one bar , 96 MMs with two bars , three MSMs , 85 MIDs and seven foreign awards . Following the armistice , the 11th Battalion was moved to <unk> , in Belgium , where the demobilisation process began . The battalion 's personnel were slowly repatriated to Australia , while those that waited undertook training to prepare them for civilian life . On 6 February 1919 , the 11th Battalion was amalgamated with the 12th , to form the 11th / 12th Battalion ; a further amalgamation occurred on 27 March when the 11th / 12th merged with the 9th / 10th Battalion , forming the 3rd Australian Infantry Brigade Battalion . A short time later , the battalion disbanded . The 11th Battalion 's final commanding officer was Major Jack O 'Neil , an original member of the battalion who had been appointed a company sergeant major during the battalion 's formative period at Blackboy Camp . 
 = = Inter war years and World War II = = 
 In 1921 , following the conclusion of the demobilisation of the AIF , the government undertook a review of Australia 's military requirements and the part @-@ time military force , the Citizens Forces , was reorganised to perpetuate the numerical designations of the AIF units . As a result , the 11th Battalion was reformed in Perth , drawing personnel and lineage from the 2nd Battalion , 11th Infantry Regiment and the 2nd Battalion , 51st Infantry Regiment . Upon formation , the battalion inherited the battle honour of " South Africa , 1899 – 1902 " , which it bore for the 1st and 2nd Battalions , West Australian Infantry . In 1927 , territorial designations were introduced and the battalion adopted the title of the " Perth Regiment " ; it was also awarded battle honours for World War I , receiving a total of 23 . Its motto at this time was <unk> . 
 Upon establishment , the Citizens Forces units were manned through both voluntary and compulsory service ; but , in 1929 – 30 , following the election of the Scullin Labor government , the compulsory service scheme was abolished and the Citizens Forces was replaced with an all volunteer " Militia " . As a result of the economic pressures of the Great Depression the number of volunteers fell , and consequently a number of infantry battalions had to be disbanded or amalgamated . The 11th Battalion was one of those amalgamated , being joined with the 16th Battalion in 1930 to become the 11th / 16th Battalion . The two units remained linked until 1 October 1936 , when the 11th Battalion ( City of Perth Regiment ) was re @-@ formed in its own right , as part of an expansion of the Militia due to concerns about war in Europe . 
 During World War II , like most Militia units , the 11th Battalion performed garrison duties for most of the war . It stayed in Western Australia , and was assigned to the 4th Division , as part of the 13th Brigade , before later moving to the Northern Territory in 1943 . Later that year , the battalion was gazetted as an AIF battalion , after more than 65 percent of its personnel volunteered to serve outside Australian territory . The battalion , along with the rest of the 13th Brigade , was later transferred to the 5th Division and saw service against the Japanese during 1945 in the New Britain Campaign . Due to the large size of Japanese forces on New Britain , the Australian campaign was focused mainly upon containment . After landing at Jacquinot Bay the battalion was based around the Tol Plantation and conducted patrolling operations to restrict the Japanese to the Gazelle Peninsula . Little contact was made and actual combat was limited ; the battalion 's casualties amounted to three dead and four wounded . Following the end of the war , the 11th Battalion was disbanded on 11 April 1946 . 
 = = Post World War II = = 
 In 1948 , Australia 's part @-@ time military force was re @-@ raised in the guise of the Citizens Military Force . At this time , the 11th / 44th Battalion ( City of Perth Regiment ) was formed . From 1960 , following a reorganisation of the Army that saw the adoption of the Pentropic divisional establishment , the 11th / 44th was reduced to a company @-@ sized element and ' A ' ( City of Perth ) Company , 1st Battalion , Royal Western Australia Regiment maintained the traditions of the 11th Battalion . The following year , the 11th Battalion was awarded the 15 battle honours that had been earned by the 11th and 2 / 11th Battalions during World War II . A separate 11th Battalion , Royal Western Australia Regiment was reformed in 1966 , being formed through a designation of the 2nd Battalion , Royal Western Australia Regiment . Ten years later , the battalion was reduced to an independent company and in 1987 , the 11th Independent Rifle Company was amalgamated with the 28th Independent Rifle Company to form the current 11th / 28th Battalion , Royal Western Australia Regiment . 
 = = Alliances = = 
 The 11th Battalion held the following alliance : 
 United Kingdom – Royal Sussex Regiment ( approved in 1925 ) . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 11th Battalion received the following battle honours : 
 Boer War 
 South Africa , 1899 – 1902 ( inherited ) . 
 World War I 
 Somme 1916 – 18 , Pozières , Bullecourt , Ypres 1917 , Menin Road , Polygon Wood , Broodseinde , Poelcappelle , Passchendaele , Lys , Hazebrouck , Amiens , Albert 1918 , Hindenburg Line , Epehy , France and Flanders 1916 – 1918 , ANZAC , Landing at ANZAC , Defence of ANZAC , Suvla , Sari Bair , Gallipoli 1915 , Egypt 1915 – 16 . 
 World War II 
 North Africa 1940 – 41 , Bardia 1941 , Capture of Tobruk , Derna , Greece 1941 , <unk> Pass , Crete , Retimo , South @-@ West Pacific 1944 – 45 , Liberation of Australian New Guinea , <unk> , Abau – Malin , Wewak , <unk> Mission . 
 = Joe West ( umpire ) = 
 Joseph Henry West ( born October 31 , 1952 ) , nicknamed " Cowboy Joe " or " Country Joe , " is an American professional baseball umpire in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . Born in Asheville , North Carolina , he grew up in Greenville and played football at East Carolina University ( ECU ) and Elon College . West entered the National League as an umpire in 1976 ; he joined the NL staff full @-@ time in 1978 . West has worn uniform number 22 throughout his career . As a young umpire , West worked Nolan Ryan 's fifth career no @-@ hitter , was on the field for Willie McCovey 's 500th home run and was involved in a 1983 pushing incident with manager Joe Torre . 
 A few years later , West was the home plate umpire during the 1988 playoff game in which pitcher Jay Howell was ejected for having pine tar on his glove . In 1990 , he threw pitcher Dennis Cook to the ground while attempting to break up a fight . West resigned during the 1999 Major League Umpires Association mass resignation , but was rehired in 2002 . Since then , he has umpired throughout MLB . In a 2004 playoff game between the Boston Red Sox and New York Yankees , West 's crew made a controversial decision that necessitated police presence to calm the crowd . He served as crew chief for the 2005 World Series . 
 In 2010 , West attracted media attention after he publicly complained about the slow pace of a game between the Red Sox and Yankees . He also worked the game that year in which Albert Pujols hit his 400th career home run . West has worked several no @-@ hitters , including a 2012 perfect game by Félix Hernández . As of 2015 , West has the longest tenure of any MLB umpire . West has appeared in five World Series , two All @-@ Star Games , nine League Championship Series ( LCS ) , seven League Division Series ( LDS ) and two Wild Card Games . 
 West is president of the World Umpires Association ( <unk> ) . As the organization 's president , West helped negotiate the largest umpiring contract in baseball history . He works with a sporting goods company to design and patent umpiring equipment endorsed by MLB . West is also a singer and songwriter , and has released two country music albums . He had a small acting role in the comedy film The Naked Gun : From the Files of Police Squad ! and a cameo appearance in the television crime drama The Oldest Rookie . He plays golf on the Celebrity Players Tour . 
 = = Early life = = 
 West was born in Asheville , North Carolina in 1952 . He grew up in Greenville , North Carolina , where he played youth baseball and football . He graduated from Rose High School in Greenville . West played safety on the freshman football team at East Carolina University ( ECU ) in 1970 and he was a quarterback for Elon College ( now Elon University ) from 1971 to 1973 . He intended to play his college football career at ECU , but head coach Mike McGee resigned after his freshman year , prompting West 's transfer . 
 While in college , West hoped to play both baseball and football . However , spring practice for football interfered with West 's ability to be on the baseball team as well . He concentrated on football and umpired high school baseball games on the side . In his three seasons at Elon , West was the starting quarterback and the team won three conference championships . He was named Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) on the 1973 team that lost the Division I National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics title game to Abilene Christian ; the Abilene Christian team was led by future professional football players Clint Longley and Wilbert Montgomery . West left Elon holding three passing records that were not broken for 20 years , and was inducted into the Elon Sports Hall of Fame in 1986 , in the same class as former North Carolina State women 's basketball coach Kay Yow . 
 = = Umpiring career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 While umpiring locally as a college student , West met Carolina League umpire supervisor Malcolm Sykes , who recommended that West attend an umpire training school . West went to umpire school and graduated at the top of his class . He worked in several minor @-@ league circuits ( the Western Carolinas League , Puerto Rican League , Florida Instructional League , Southern League and American Association ) before he was promoted to the major leagues . West made his first National League ( NL ) appearance in 1976 and joined the full @-@ time NL staff in 1978 . 
 In his first season as a full @-@ time MLB umpire , West umpired the game in which Willie McCovey hit his 500th career home run . In the same year , he was at first base when Pete Rose tied the NL record for most consecutive games with a hit , and he was the home plate umpire when Rose broke it the following day . In 1981 , West worked first base for Nolan Ryan ’ s fifth career no @-@ hitter . On October 13 , 1981 , West was 28 when he became the youngest NL umpire to call an LCS . In 1983 , West was suspended for three days and fined US $ 500 after a shoving incident with Atlanta Braves manager Joe Torre . The manager became angry at the end of a game and followed West into the walkway outside the umpires dressing room . West then shoved Torre . On appeal , NL President Chub Feeney reduced West 's fine to $ 300 . Torre also received a fine stemming from the incident . 
 = = = Middle career = = = 
 West made his second NLCS appearance in 1986 . He umpired his first All @-@ Star Game in 1987 . On September 28 , 1988 , West was on the field when Orel Hershiser set the MLB record for consecutive scoreless innings pitched . West returned to the NLCS in 1988 and was the plate umpire when Dodgers pitcher Jay Howell was ejected for having pine tar on his glove . 
 During a 1990 on @-@ field brawl , West attempted to break up the fight by throwing Phillies pitcher Dennis Cook to the ground . The matter ultimately was handled among West , NL President Bill White , then @-@ Commissioner Fay Vincent and the umpires union . West said White supported his actions in the brawl , but White quickly issued a statement saying he had prohibited West from making further physical contact with players . White was reported to have nearly resigned due to lack of support from Vincent , but the NL president remained in his post after receiving support from league owners . West met more controversy the next year when Chicago Cubs outfielder Andre Dawson bumped him after a called third strike during a game at Wrigley Field . After Dawson was ejected from the game , he walked back to the dugout and tossed 14 bats onto the field . Chicago fans threw debris onto the field , causing a delay in the game . Dawson received a one @-@ game suspension and a $ 1 @,@ 000 fine . On his check to the league , Dawson wrote " donation for the blind . " 
 In 1992 , West made his first World Series appearance when the Atlanta Braves faced the Toronto Blue Jays . West was behind the plate in the first World Series game played in Canada and ejected Braves manager Bobby Cox for throwing a helmet onto the field . In 1993 , he appeared in the NLCS . He worked another no @-@ hitter on April 8 , 1994 , when Kent <unk> shut down the Los Angeles Dodgers . The 1995 NLDS was West ’ s first League Division Series . The following year West worked in the NLCS . He returned to the World Series in 1997 , when the Cleveland Indians faced the Florida Marlins . 
 In 1999 , West was among 22 MLB umpires who engaged in mass resignations during a labor dispute . The strategy backfired when MLB simply accepted the resignations instead of entering into further negotiations with the umpiring union . The union filed charges against MLB with the National Labor Relations Board , saying the mass resignation was " a concerted action protected by law . " After arbitration and appeals , MLB settled with the union . A few umpires received severance pay and were allowed to retire under the settlement , but West and several other umpires were rehired by MLB in 2002 . 
 = = = Since rehire = = = 
 In the same year he returned to the field , West worked in the ALDS . He also umpired in the 2003 and 2004 ALCS . In game six of the latter series , West 's crew ruled Yankees batter Alex Rodriguez out for interference after Rodriguez appeared to swat the ball out of the glove of opposing pitcher Bronson Arroyo on his way to first base . Fans threw debris on the field , Red Sox manager Terry Francona pulled his team off the field , and NYPD officers in riot gear took to the field to calm the crowd . West said fans actually applauded the umpires for the correct call when they came onto the field the following day . West ’ s first All @-@ Star Game and World Series appearances after his rehire came in 2005 ; that year he umpired in his second ALDS and his third World Series , serving as World Series crew chief . 
 West was the home plate umpire when rookie pitcher Clay Buchholz threw a no @-@ hitter against the Baltimore Orioles on September 1 , 2007 , at Fenway Park ; West called a curveball strike three for the final out . He worked his 4,000th career game on July 30 , 2009 , at Miller Park in Milwaukee , Wisconsin ; he ejected Washington Nationals manager Jim <unk> from the contest . That same year he appeared in the American League Division Series and the World Series . He was also elected president of the World Umpires Association ( <unk> ) . West and the union 's governing board negotiated the largest umpiring contract in the history of MLB . The contract runs from 2010 through the 2014 season . West designed the chest protector sold commercially as the West Vest , now marketed by Wilson Sporting Goods . He holds patents on the West Vest in the US , Australia , Canada and Japan . He also designed Wilson 's high @-@ end umpiring gear , the only umpiring equipment endorsed by MLB . 
 In 2010 , West sparked controversy by criticizing the slow pace of the recently completed series between the New York Yankees and Boston Red Sox , which he called " pathetic and embarrassing . " Red Sox manager Terry Francona referred to the remarks as " troubling " , while Yankees closer Mariano Rivera remarked , " If he has places to go , let him do something else " . Columnist Wallace Matthews defended West , saying the umpire was simply expressing what people had been thinking for a long time . West was not fined by MLB for his comments , but was " admonished firmly , " according to press reports . On August 26 , 2010 , West was the plate umpire for Albert Pujols ’ 400th career home run . 
 On September 14 , 2014 , West ejected Jonathan Papelbon , resulting in a confrontation where West grabbed Papelbon 's jersey . West later falsely claimed Papelbon had initiated first contact . Videos replay showed West was not correct , Papelbon had not touched him . MLB subsequently suspended Papelbon for seven games for his lewd act and West for one game for initiating contact with Papelbon , marking the first umpire suspension since Fieldin Culbreth 's May 2013 suspension for misapplication of baseball rules and the first on @-@ field misconduct suspension of an umpire since Bob Davidson 's May 2012 suspension for situation handling violations related to his ejection of Phillies Manager Charlie Manuel . 
 West umpired in his second NLDS ( and fifth LDS ) in 2011 . The next year West was the first base umpire for Félix Hernández 's August 15 perfect game against the Tampa Bay Rays . He umpired another NLDS that year , then appeared in his fifth World Series . His career has spanned the tenure of baseball commissioners Bowie Kuhn , Peter Ueberroth , Bart Giamatti , Fay Vincent , Bud Selig and Rob Manfred . As of the 2014 season , West was MLB 's most senior umpire . Umpire Bruce Froemming , who was previously the most senior umpire , spent 37 seasons in MLB , but he announced his retirement in 2007 . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
