 West has been mentioned in several polls of MLB players . In 2006 , the spring after he was crew chief in the World Series , a Sports Illustrated survey asked 470 MLB players to identify the best and worst umpires . West was identified as the best MLB umpire by 2 percent of those players , ranking him ninth on that list . With respect to the worst umpire , 6 percent of players in the survey selected West . Only three umpires were named more frequently as worst umpire in the survey . A 2007 review of umpire strike zones by The Hardball Times determined that West was the most consistent umpire in the major leagues . 
 In a 2010 poll of 100 players , West ranked as the second @-@ worst umpire in the league . In a 2011 players poll , West was named the best MLB umpire by 5 percent of players polled , placing him fifth . However , he was named the worst umpire in the same poll by 41 percent of players polled . 
 = = Outside of baseball = = 
 West is known outside of umpiring as a singer – songwriter . His involvement in country music and his demeanor on the field have earned him the nickname " Cowboy Joe . " West has described his music as " two chords and the truth . ... It 's simple . It tells a story . " In 2009 , West said of his music pursuits , " I was lucky . You know , the dues you have to pay to get here as an umpire are long and tedious , but the music business , because I was already in the major leagues , kind of opened a lot of doors I normally wouldn 't have been able to open . " 
 West has appeared at the Grand Ole Opry . He has performed with Mickey Gilley , Johnny Lee and Merle Haggard . West served as a pallbearer for Boxcar Willie . 
 West released his first album , Blue Cowboy , in 1987 . Blue Cowboy is an album of three original songs and five covers . Chuck Yarborough of the Cleveland Plain Dealer said , " Listening to the first excerpt of his " Blue Cowboy " made me balk — you 'll pardon the expression — at listening to the second . But I did . And the third . And so on . And now ? Well , if I 'm Nashville , I run West outta the game . The Hook . The Heave @-@ Ho . The Thumb . " In a September 2012 review , music blog Long After Dark said , " Blue Cowboy easily ranks with Ron Artest and Carl Lewis as one of the worst albums that a sports figure has cut ... ever . I can say that I managed to make it through the record , although it was not easy . " 
 He released Diamond Dreams in 2008 . The album was a collaboration with Kent Goodson , pianist for country star George Jones . It tells baseball stories inspired by West 's umpiring career . Goodson later said , " As I look back on how this CD came together , I realize that I am a musician and Joe is an umpire . But his love for music and my love for baseball bonded us in this project . " Sports blogger Voodoo Brown described West as " in <unk> from the gate . " Sportswriter Doug Miller said that the album was " a fun , humorous and often touching collection of spoken @-@ word gems in which the listener gets a perfect sampling of the true personality of Cowboy Joe West . " 
 West has made one film appearance , playing a third base umpire in the 1988 comedy film The Naked Gun : From the Files of Police Squad ! He also made a cameo appearance on the television crime drama The Oldest Rookie , An avid golfer , West appears on the Celebrity Players Tour . 
 = Ched Evans = 
 <unk> Michael " Ched " Evans ( born 28 December 1988 ) is a Welsh footballer who plays as a striker for League One club Chesterfield . 
 Born in St Asaph , Denbighshire , Evans was signed by Manchester City from Chester City 's youth set up in 2002 and he subsequently progressed through the ranks . Evans was loaned to Norwich City in 2007 , where he scored 10 goals in 28 league appearances , before returning to his parent club . With first team opportunities at City limited he was subsequently sold to Sheffield United for £ 3 million in 2009 . After an unspectacular first two seasons at Bramall Lane he scored 35 goals during the 2011 – 12 season . He also represented Wales at Wales under @-@ 21 and senior level , scoring on his debut for the national side in 2008 , and making a total of 13 appearances . 
 Evans was convicted of rape in April 2012 and spent two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years in prison . His conviction was quashed on 21 April 2016 by the Court of Appeal , after a referral by the Criminal Cases Review Commission , and a retrial has been ordered . In June 2016 , he signed a contract for Chesterfield . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Manchester City = = = 
 Evans began his playing career in Rhyl , before spending two seasons in Chester City 's youth set @-@ up from where he moved to Manchester City in 2002 following the closure of Chester 's youth team . During the 2006 – 07 season , Evans was a regular in the Academy and reserve teams and was also in the side that reached the final of the 2006 FA Youth Cup , where City lost to Liverpool . In May 2007 , Evans signed his first professional contract with Manchester City . 
 In September 2007 Evans came off the bench to make his senior debut in City ’ s 1 – 0 League Cup victory against Norwich City . With first choice opportunities at City limited Evans moved on loan to Norwich City in November of that year , agreeing a deal until 1 January 2008 . He made his debut for Norwich the following week when he came on as a substitute in the 3 – 1 victory over Blackpool . His first goal for the club came two games later , and just two minutes into his first start in a 2 – 1 victory over Plymouth Argyle at the start of December . Evans returned to Manchester City after his initial loan deal expired in January 2008 , having made eight appearances and scored two goals . 
 Initially , Norwich manager Glenn Roeder 's attempts to extend the loan were refused , however , on 10 January , the two clubs agreed a deal to allow Evans to return to Norwich on loan until 26 February , with Manchester City able to recall him after an initial period . However , after talks between the two clubs at the end of January 2008 , the deal was extended to allow Evans to stay with the Carrow Road club until the end of the season . Then Manchester City manager Sven @-@ Göran Eriksson stated he had no plans to sell Evans and that he would not be leaving the summer transfer window . Evans played regularly for Norwich for the remainder of his loan spell and by the end of the season he had notched up 10 goals from 20 starts and eight substitute appearances . 
 Evans made his Premier League debut for Manchester City in the opening game of the following season on 18 August , against Aston Villa . He was not chosen for the starting eleven but replaced Valeri <unk> , who suffered an injury during the pre @-@ game warm @-@ up . Evans scored his first Premier League goal for Manchester City against Portsmouth on 21 September , scoring the fifth goal as City went on to win 6 – 0 . With City 's acquisition of Craig Bellamy and later Emmanuel Adebayor , Roque Santa Cruz and Carlos Tevez , Evans opted to leave in 2009 in order to get more first team football . 
 = = = Sheffield United = = = 
 Evans joined Sheffield United for an initial fee of £ 3 million plus possible future add @-@ ons on a three @-@ year deal in July 2009 , making his debut for United in the first game of the new season ; a 0 – 0 draw with Middlesbrough . Having bagged a brace for the Wales U21s during the midweek fixtures he then scored his first goal in Blades colours on his home debut , a 2 – 0 win over Watford . Despite a promising start Evans struggled to maintain any real form and was often relegated to the role of substitute during his first season with the Blades , making 36 appearances but scoring only four goals . The following season Evans was a regular first team choice and his form and scoring rate began to improve , despite the club going through a season of turmoil and battling against relegation . He finished the campaign as top scorer with nine goals in all competitions , but was unable to prevent the team dropping out of the division . 
 With the Blades now in League One there was speculation that Evans would be sold to ease the club 's wage bill but an injury picked up in the last days of the previous campaign meant he was unavailable until early September , preventing him from moving on to another club . Having returned from injury Evans hit a rich vein of form scoring regularly in both league and cup competitions as the Blades contested for promotion . On 28 March 2012 he scored a second @-@ half hat trick within 15 minutes against Chesterfield giving him his thirtieth goal of the season in a 4 – 1 win for Sheffield United at Bramall Lane . During this impressive third season , Evans drew attention from Championship and Premier League clubs with his contract scheduled to expire in the summer . However , Blades manager Danny Wilson stated that Evans " [ wasn ’ t ] even thinking about leaving Bramall Lane " , adding " Of course we don ’ t want to lose Ched . We still need to achieve sustainability whatever division we are in and of course people are bound to take notice of the goals he ’ s getting , maybe I ’ m in cloud cuckoo land but I don ’ t think it always comes down to money and , talking to Ched , I know he ’ s very happy . " Evans was named League One Player of the Month for March 2012 , having scored 10 goals in 8 games . He was nominated for ' League One Player of the Season ' , and in April 2012 Evans was named in the League One PFA Team of the Year . He ended the season with 35 goals in all competitions , but following his rape conviction Evans was released by United at the end of the season . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = Wales U21s = = = 
 Evans gained his first Wales U21 cap in 2007 . He became a regular member of the squad and in November 2007 he scored a hat @-@ trick against France U21s . In doing so he became only the fourth player to have scored a hat @-@ trick for the under @-@ 21 side , along with John Hartson , Craig Davies and Lee Jones . Evans scored a brace against Bosnia and Herzegovina U21s in October 2009 , taking his tally for the Welsh U21s to 13 goals in 12 games . 
 = = = Wales = = = 
 Evans made his senior debut for Wales on 28 May 2008 , scoring the winning goal ( with a back heel ) in a 1 – 0 away friendly victory against Iceland . He made 13 appearances for Wales in total , scoring once . 
 = = = Team GB ambitions = = = 
 On 28 March 2012 Stuart Pearce , the Great Britain Olympic football team manager , was present at the match against Chesterfield , in which Evans scored a hat @-@ trick , taking his season tally to thirty , in a 4 – 1 win at Bramall Lane . Evans commented on the possibility of representing Team GB at the London 2012 Summer Olympics : " If I was asked then it 's something I 'd definitely look at doing . I don 't know whether I even will be though ... But if the chance was there then , like anyone else , I ’ d certainly have to think about it . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Evans was born in St Asaph , Denbighshire . His father left the family after Evans 's birth . 
 After signing for Sheffield United , Evans moved to Millhouse Green , Penistone , in the nearby Barnsley area . After the death of former Wales boss and Sheffield United player , coach and manager Gary Speed , Evans revealed a message under his shirt after scoring his first goal in the FA Cup win over Torquay United , which read : " Rest in peace Speedo . " Evans stated regarding the death of Gary Speed that " I was a man on a mission . I had a message on my top for Gary Speed which I wanted to show . I 'm thankful I got the goal ... the crowd started singing [ Speed 's name ] – it gave me goose pimples ... not one person has a bad word to say about him , he was a gentleman ... even people who haven 't met him know how much of a nice man he was ... it still hasn 't hit home , it still feels surreal . " 
 Since 2009 , Evans has been dating Natasha Massey . Massey 's father , Karl , a businessman , funded a website , " <unk> " , which proclaimed Evans to be " wrongly convicted of rape on 20th April 2012 " . He also hired lawyers for an appeal . In January 2015 , the Attorney general 's office announced that they were " considering the issues " of a possible breach of the contempt of court laws by the website . Evans and Massey have a son , born in January 2016 . 
 = = = Rape trial = = = 
 Evans and another footballer , Clayton McDonald , were tried at the Crown Court at Caernarfon after being indicted of the rape of a 19 @-@ year @-@ old woman , who was deemed too drunk to consent , at an hotel near Rhyl in May 2011 . Evans was convicted on 20 April 2012 and was sentenced to five years imprisonment . He was eligible for release after serving half of that sentence . During his incarceration , Evans worked as a painter and decorator in the prison in order to afford a healthy diet . In August 2012 , Evans was refused leave to appeal against the conviction by a single Court of Appeal of England and Wales judge and the full court upheld the decision in November . Evans continues to maintain his innocence and in November 2013 recruited a new legal team to attempt to clear his name . 
 He was released on 17 October 2014 , although he remains on the Violent and Sex Offender Register indefinitely . Following his release , the Criminal Cases Review Commission announced that they were fast @-@ tracking a review of his conviction . In January 2015 , it was reported that Evans had submitted fresh evidence to the Criminal Cases Review Commission , with the claim that it would strengthen his case . In October 2015 the Criminal Cases Review Commission , following a ten @-@ month investigation , and relying on " new material which was not considered by the jury at trial " referred the case to an appeal before the Court of Appeal . The Chair of the commission stated that the " decision of the commission is not a judgment on guilt or innocence in relation to Ched Evans , nor is it a judgement about the honesty or integrity of the victim or any other person involved in the case . " 
 On 22 March 2016 the case was heard by the Court of Appeal , which imposed a ban on reporting details of the legal argument . On 21 April 2016 , the appeal was allowed and the conviction quashed . A retrial was ordered , and the details of the reasons for the decision cannot be reported until the conclusion of the retrial . Evans ' retrial is due to begin on 4 October 2016 . 
 = = Attempts to find a new club = = 
 = = = Sheffield United = = = 
 In April 2014 , Sheffield United Co @-@ Chairman Kevin McCabe and new manager Nigel Clough met with Evans in HM Prison <unk> to discuss the possibility of Sheffield United re @-@ signing Evans after his release from prison . Following speculation that Evans could rejoin his former club , a petition was signed by 150 @,@ 000 people urging the club not to do so , which stated that it would be a " deep insult to the woman who was raped and to all women like her who have suffered at the hands of a rapist " . 
 In November 2014 , following his release from prison , it was announced that Evans would resume training with Sheffield United after the Professional Footballers ' Association had requested that Sheffield United let Evans train at the club as they were his last club before his conviction . The decision was controversial , and caused television presenter Charlie Webster , businesswoman Lindsay Graham and musicians Dave Berry and Paul Heaton to resign as patrons of the club . Athlete Jessica Ennis @-@ Hill stated that she would want her name removed from a stand at Bramall Lane if Evans were signed by the club . 
 The Football League stated that although they recognised the gravity of Evans ' crime , they valued the reintegration of reformed criminals and could not take any action against any club which would hire Evans . Sheffield United manager Nigel Clough said on 12 November that the club were " nowhere near " signing Evans , citing his 30 months out of the professional game and an important run of fixtures as reasons why a decision would not be taken immediately . <unk> Logistics , Sheffield United 's sponsor on the back of their shirts , stated that they would end their sponsorship if Evans were signed by the club . John Holland Sales , who sponsor on the front of the shirts , declared that they would " re @-@ evaluate " their relation to the club if he were signed . On 20 November , Sheffield United withdrew their offer to allow Evans to use their training facilities . Co @-@ chairman Jim Phipps , however , attributed the decision to " mob @-@ like behaviour " , stating his belief that Evans had a right to return to his career having served his sentence . 
 = = = Hartlepool United = = = 
 In December 2014 , Hartlepool United manager Ronnie Moore said that he would like Evans to join the club . The comment brought criticism from Hartlepool 's MP , Iain Wright , who described Evans as a " pariah " . The club later followed up this headline with a statement saying that Hartlepool does not wish to sign Evans . 
 = = = Hibernians = = = 
 On 2 January 2015 , Hibernians of the Maltese Premier League , through their English vice @-@ president Stephen Vaughan , announced that they had offered Evans a contract up to the end of the season . The British Ministry of Justice said that such a move would not be possible as Evans was a convicted sex offender on licence and , as such , barred from working abroad . Malta 's Prime Minister , Joseph Muscat , warned Hibernians that hiring Evans could affect the whole country 's reputation , while Justice Minister Owen Bonnici stated that Evans had a right to return to his profession after being released from prison . 
 = = = Oldham Athletic = = = 
 On 4 January 2015 , it was reported that Evans had been in discussion with League One club Oldham Athletic and was expected to sign for them in a deal which may be worth as little as £ 400 per week . The club 's manager Lee Johnson was reported to have expressed " grave reservations " about the signing , but was overruled by the club 's owner Simon Corney . A petition against the signing gathered 19 @,@ 000 signatures within a few hours and over 30 @,@ 000 by the next day , while politicians such as Labour Party leader Ed Miliband voiced their opposition to the move . 
 On 8 January 2015 , Oldham Athletic ended their interest in signing Evans , citing that proceeding could have resulted in " significant financial pressure " and would have " continued to be a divisive influence " , while condemning the " vile and abusive threats , some including death threats , which have been made to our fans , sponsors and staff " . BBC Sport reported that a named relative of a staff member was threatened with rape , and that one sponsor already having ended their association with Oldham in protest and another saying that it would follow suit if Evans signed . The petition against Evans signing had reached over 60 @,@ 000 signatures . Meanwhile , a total of ten other clubs ( other than Oldham and Sheffield United ) from League One and League Two told BBC Sport that they would not sign Evans . 
 Evans stated that he withdrew from the deal due to " mob rule " , and that he was concerned the building of Oldham 's new stand would be adversely affected by his signing . He also apologised for any grievances he had caused due to his rape case , but maintained his innocence . Journalist Henry Winter , writing for The Daily Telegraph , refuted Evans ' claims , instead saying that " it was people ’ s disgust that a convicted rapist felt he could swan back into a high @-@ profile job after revealing no remorse for a crime that would preclude re @-@ employment for many " , while criticising Evans for making " his statement of contrition ... on the offensive , legally questionable website that continues to make life miserable for his victim " . 
 = = = Grimsby Town = = = 
 On 8 January 2015 , it was announced by Grimsby Town director John Fenty that a financial backer had offered the club to pay his full wages in order to bring Evans to the Conference Premier club . Having held a board meeting along with team manager Paul Hurst it was decided that the move would be of too high risk for the club . Grimsby had previously employed Clayton McDonald , the fellow footballer and friend of Evans who was acquitted in the same case , during the 2013 – 14 season . 
 = = = Chesterfield = = = 
 On 20 June 2016 , Evans signed his first contract since his release from prison and the quashing of his conviction , signing for one year at Chesterfield in League One . He was signed by his former Sheffield United manager Wilson , and their first @-@ team coach was his former Blades teammate Chris Morgan . 
 He scored on his debut for Chesterfield on 23 July , his first game in nearly four years , in a 3 – 0 friendly win over Ilkeston . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of 14 April 2012 . 
 1 . ^ Statistics includes Football League Trophy . 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of 5 May 2012 . 
 = 2013 CECAFA Cup = 
 The 2013 CECAFA Cup ( known as the <unk> CECAFA Challenge Cup for sponsorship reasons ) was the 37th edition of the annual CECAFA Cup , an international football competition consisting of the national teams of member nations of the Council for East and Central Africa Football Associations ( CECAFA ) . The tournament was held in Kenya from 27 November to 12 December . 
 Contested by twelve national teams , the tournament had Zambia invited as a guest nation to fill in for Djibouti , who failed to participate for a second consecutive year . This followed the tournament 's recent tradition of inviting other African nations to take part once a CECAFA nation pulled out ; Malawi were invited to take part in the previous edition held in Uganda , while they and Zimbabwe took part in 2011 after Eritrea withdrew from the competition . 
 Hosts Kenya ran out 2 – 0 winners in the final against three @-@ time champions Sudan , with a brace from Allan Wanga securing the <unk> Stars their sixth title after losing to previous hosts Uganda at the same stage the previous year . The third place playoff was won by guests Zambia , who beat Tanzania 6 – 5 on penalties after playing out to a 1 – 1 draw after 90 minutes . 
 = = Background and sponsorship = = 
 On 25 November 2012 , it was announced that Kenya was chosen to host the tournament after bids were placed by the host nation as well as Rwanda . However , their hosting of the tournament was not confirmed until a congress meeting for the Confederation of African Football held in Marrakesh , Morocco on 11 March 2013 , after it was announced that the Football Kenya Federation had met all the requirements for hosting the tournaments with support from the Kenyan government . The capital city Nairobi , Mombasa , Kisumu , Machakos and Nakuru were identified as host cities for the tournament . 
 On 21 November 2013 , CECAFA announced that <unk> would be the title sponsors of the tournament , having committed Ksh . 11 @.@ 25 million towards the organisation of the event and a further Ksh . 45 million towards the broadcasting of all 26 matches . Other companies that were sponsoring the tournament were Coca @-@ Cola , who committed Ksh . 6 @.@ 5 million , and UAP Insurance , who committed Ksh . 5 @.@ 5 million . 
 Of Ksh . 8 @.@ 7 million ( approx . US $ 100 @,@ 000 ) that was allocated for prize money , the winners were to receive Ksh . 5 @.@ 6 million , while the runners @-@ up were to take home Ksh . 2 @.@ 5 million . The third place playoff winners were to receive Ksh . 600 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Participants = = 
 The draw for teams to participate in the tournament was held during the tournament 's launch on 15 November 2013 . Alongside the 12 member nations of CECAFA , Ivory Coast , Malawi and Zambia were initially mooted as invitees for the tournament . However , CECAFA decided against inviting the Ivory Coast , with Secretary @-@ General Nicholas Musonye saying that flying in Les <unk> and keeping them in the country would cost the organisers over US $ 25 @,@ 000 . The Football Association of Malawi decided not to enter a team for the tournament due to a lack of funds . 
 The following teams were confirmed to participate in the tournament : 
 = = Match officials = = 
 The following 18 officials were appointed by CECAFA to participate in the tournament . 
 Referees 
 Assistant referees 
 = = Group stage = = 
 The group stage began on 27 November and ended on 5 December . The matchdays were 27 – 29 November , 30 November – 2 December and 3 – 5 December . 
 = Aylesbury duck = 
 The Aylesbury duck is a breed of domesticated duck , bred mainly for its meat and appearance . It is a large duck with pure white plumage , a pink bill , orange legs and feet , an unusually large keel , and a horizontal stance with its body parallel to the ground . The precise origins of the breed are unclear , but raising white ducks became popular in Aylesbury , Buckinghamshire , England , in the 18th century owing to the demand for white feathers as a filler for quilts . Over the 19th century selective breeding for size , shape and colour led to the Aylesbury duck . 
 Duck rearing became a major industry in Aylesbury in the 19th century . The ducks were bred on farms in the surrounding countryside . Fertilised eggs were brought into the town 's " Duck End " , where local residents would rear the ducklings in their homes . The opening of a railway to Aylesbury in 1839 enabled cheap and quick transport to the markets of London , and duck rearing became highly profitable . By the 1860s the duck rearing industry began to move out of Aylesbury into the surrounding towns and villages , and the industry in Aylesbury itself began to decline . 
 In 1873 the Pekin duck was introduced to the United Kingdom . Although its meat was thought to have a poorer flavour than that of the Aylesbury duck , the Pekin was hardier and cheaper to raise . Many breeders switched to the Pekin duck or to Aylesbury @-@ Pekin crosses . By the beginning of the 20th century competition from the Pekin duck , inbreeding , and disease in the pure @-@ bred Aylesbury strain and the rising cost of duck food meant the Aylesbury duck industry was in decline . 
 The First World War badly damaged the remaining duck industry in Buckinghamshire , wiping out the small scale producers and leaving only a few large farms . Disruption caused by the Second World War further damaged the industry . By the 1950s only one significant flock of Aylesbury ducks remained in Buckinghamshire , and by 1966 there were no duck @-@ breeding or <unk> businesses of any size remaining in Aylesbury itself . Although there is only one surviving flock of pure Aylesbury ducks in the United Kingdom and the breed is critically endangered in the United States , the Aylesbury duck remains a symbol of the town of Aylesbury , and appears on the coat of arms of Aylesbury and on the club badge of Aylesbury United . 
 = = Origins and description = = 
 The precise origin of the Aylesbury duck is unclear . Before the 18th century , duck breeds were rarely recorded in England , and the common duck , bred for farming , was a domesticated form of the wild mallard . The common duck varied in colour , and as in the wild , white ducks would occasionally occur . White ducks were particularly prized , as their feathers were popular as a filler for quilts . 
 In the 18th century selective breeding of white common ducks led to a white domestic duck , generally known as the English White . Since at least the 1690s ducks had been farmed in Aylesbury , and raising English Whites became popular in Aylesbury and the surrounding villages . By 1813 it was remarked that " ducks form a material article at market from Aylesbury and places adjacent : they are white , and as it seems of an early breed : they are bred and brought up by poor people , and sent to London by the weekly carriers " . The duck farmers of Aylesbury went to great lengths to ensure the ducks retained their white colouring , keeping them clear of dirty water , soil with a high iron content and bright sunlight , all of which could discolour the ducks ' feathers . Over time , selective breeding of the English White for size and colour gradually led to the development of the Aylesbury duck . 
 A rather large duck breed , the Aylesbury duck has pure white plumage and bright orange legs and feet . Its legs are placed midway along the body and it stands with its underside parallel to the ground , giving it a body described as " boat @-@ shaped " . It has a relatively long and thin swan @-@ like neck , and a long pink bill which comes straight out from the head . 
 An Aylesbury duckling incubates in the egg for 28 days . Until eight weeks after hatching , the time of their first moult , ducks and drakes ( females and males ) are almost indistinguishable . After moulting , males have two or three curved tail feathers and a fainter , huskier quack than the female . By one year of age , females and males grow to an average weight of 6 and 7 pounds ( 2 @.@ 7 and 3 @.@ 2 kg ) respectively , although males can reach around 10 pounds ( 4 @.@ 5 kg ) . 
 Unlike the Rouen duck , the other popular meat variety in England in the 19th century , Aylesbury ducks lay eggs from early November . Aylesbury ducks fatten quickly and by eight weeks after hatching weigh up to 5 pounds ( 2 @.@ 3 kg ) , large enough to eat but still young and extremely tender . Consequently , their meat came onto the market from February onwards , after the close of the game season but before the earliest spring chickens were on sale . Rouen ducks , whose mallard @-@ like coloration made them less valuable , lay eggs from early February and take six months to grow large enough to eat . As a consequence , Aylesbury ducks were sold primarily in the spring and summer , and Rouen ducks in the autumn and winter . 
 = = Aylesbury duck farming = = 
 The white Aylesbury duck is , and deservedly , a universal favourite . Its snowy plumage and comfortable comportment make it a credit to the poultry @-@ yard , while its broad and deep breast , and its ample back , convey the assurance that your satisfaction will not cease at its death . In parts of Buckinghamshire , this member of the duck family is bred on an extensive scale ; not on plains and commons , however , as might be naturally imagined , but in the abodes of the cottagers . Round the walls of the living @-@ rooms , and of the bedroom even , are fixed rows of wooden boxes , lined with hay ; and it is the business of the wife and children to nurse and comfort the feathered lodgers , to feed the little ducklings , and to take the old ones out for an airing . Sometimes the " stock " ducks are the cottager 's own property , but it more frequently happens that they are intrusted to his care by a wholesale breeder , who pays him so much per score for all ducklings properly raised . To be perfect , the Aylesbury duck should be plump , pure white , with yellow feet , and a flesh coloured beak . 
 Unlike most livestock farming in England at this time , the duck breeders and duck <unk> of Aylesbury formed two separate groups . Stock ducks — i.e. , ducks kept for breeding — were kept on farms in the countryside of the Aylesbury Vale , away from the polluted air and water of the town . This kept the ducks healthy , and meant a higher number of fertile eggs . 
 Stock ducks would be chosen from ducklings hatched in March , with a typical breeder keeping six males and twenty laying females at any given time . The females would be kept for around a year before mating , typically to an older male . They would then generally be replaced , to reduce the problems of inbreeding . Stock ducks were allowed to roam freely during the day , and would swim in local ponds which , although privately owned , were treated as common property among the duck breeders ; breeders would label their ducks with markings on the neck or head . The stock ducks would forage for greenery and insects , supplemented by greaves ( the residue left after the rendering of animal fat ) . As ducks lay their eggs at night , the ducks would be brought indoors overnight . 
 Female Aylesbury ducks would not sit still for the 28 days necessary for their eggs to hatch , and as a consequence the breeders would not allow mothers to sit on their own eggs . Instead the fertilised eggs would be collected and transferred to the " duckers " of Aylesbury 's Duck End . 
 = = = Rearing = = = 
 The duckers of Aylesbury would buy eggs from the breeders , or be paid by a breeder to raise the ducks on their behalf , and would raise the ducklings in their homes between November and August as a secondary source of income . <unk> were typically skilled labourers , who invested surplus income in ducklings . Many of the tasks related to rearing the ducks would be carried out by the women of the household , particularly the care of newly hatched ducklings . 
 The eggs would be divided into batches of 13 , and placed under broody chickens . In the last week of the four @-@ week incubation period the eggs would be sprinkled daily with warm water to soften the shells and allow the ducklings to hatch . 
 Newly hatched Aylesbury ducklings are timid and thrive best in small groups , so the duckers would divide them into groups of three or four ducklings , each accompanied by a hen . As the ducklings grew older and gained confidence , they would be kept in groups of around 30 . Originally the ducks would be kept in every room in the ducker 's cottage , but towards the end of the 19th century they were kept in outdoor pens and sheds with suitable protection against cold weather . 
 The aim of the ducker was to get every duckling as fat as possible by the age of eight weeks ( the first moult , the age at which they would be killed for meat ) , while avoiding any foods which would build up their bones or make their flesh greasy . In their first week after hatching , the ducklings would be fed on boiled eggs , toast soaked in water , boiled rice and beef liver . From the second week on , this diet would gradually be replaced by barley meal and boiled rice mixed with greaves . ( Some larger @-@ scale duckers would boil a horse or sheep and feed this to the ducklings in place of greaves . ) This high @-@ protein diet was supplemented with nettles , cabbage and lettuce to provide a source of vitamins . As with all poultry , ducks require grit in their diet to break up the food and make it digestible . Aylesbury ducklings ' drinking water was laced with grit from Long Marston and <unk> ; this grit also gave their bills their distinctive pinkish colour . Around 85 % of ducklings would survive this eight @-@ week rearing process to be sent to market . 
 While ducks are naturally aquatic , swimming can be dangerous to young ducklings , and it can also restrict a duck 's growth . Thus , although duckers would ensure the ducklings always had a trough or sink to paddle in , the ducklings would be kept away from bodies of water while they were growing . The exception was shortly before slaughter , when the ducklings would be taken for one swim in a pond , as it helped them to feather properly . 
 Although there were a few large @-@ scale duck rearing operations in Aylesbury , raising thousands of ducklings each season , the majority of Aylesbury 's duckers would raise between 400 and 1 @,@ 000 ducklings each year . Because ducking was a secondary occupation , it was not listed in Aylesbury 's census returns or directories and it is impossible to know how many people were engaged in it at any given time . Kelly 's Directory for 1864 does not list a single duck farmer in Aylesbury , but an 1885 book comments that : 
 In the early years of the present [ 19th ] century almost every householder at the " Duck End " of the town followed the avocation of ducker . In a living room it was no uncommon sight to meet with young ducks of different ages , divided in pens and monopolizing the greatest space of the apartment , whilst expected new arrivals often were carefully lodged in the bedchamber . 
 The Duck End was one of the poorer districts of Aylesbury . Until the end of the 19th century it had no sewers or refuse collections . The area had a number of open ditches filled with stagnant water , and outbreaks of malaria and cholera were common . The cottages had inadequate ventilation and lighting , and no running water . <unk> from the duck ponds permeated the local soil and seeped into the cottages through cracks in the floors . 
 = = = Slaughter and sale = = = 
 When the ducklings were ready for slaughter , the duckers would generally kill them on their own premises . The slaughter would generally take place in the morning , to ensure the ducks would be ready for market in the evening . To keep the meat as white as possible , the ducks would be suspended upside down and their necks broken backwards , and held in this position until their blood had run towards their heads . They were kept in this position for ten minutes before being plucked , as otherwise their blood would collect in those parts of the body from which the feathers had been plucked . The plucking was generally carried out by the women of the household . The plucked carcasses would be sent to market , and the feathers would be sold direct to London dealers . 
 The market for duck meat in Aylesbury itself was small , and the ducks were generally sent to London for sale . By the 1750s Richard Pococke recorded that four cartloads of ducks were sent from Aylesbury to London every Saturday , and in the late 18th and early 19th centuries the ducks continued to be sent over the Chiltern Hills to London by packhorse or cart . 
 On 15 June 1839 the entrepreneur and former Member of Parliament for Buckingham , Sir Harry Verney , 2nd Baronet , opened the Aylesbury Railway . Built under the direction of Robert Stephenson , it connected the London and Birmingham Railway 's Cheddington railway station on the West Coast Main Line to Aylesbury High Street railway station in eastern Aylesbury . On 1 October 1863 the Wycombe Railway also built a line to Aylesbury , from Princes Risborough railway station to a station on the western side of Aylesbury ( the present @-@ day Aylesbury railway station ) . The arrival of the railway had a powerful impact on the duck industry , and up to a ton of ducks in a night were being shipped from Aylesbury to Smithfield Market in London by 1850 . 
 A routine became established in which salesmen would provide the duckers with labels . The duckers would mark their ducklings with the labels of the firm to whom they wished them to be sold in London . The railway companies would collect ducklings , take them to the stations , ship them to London and deliver them to the designated firms , in return for a flat fee per bird . By avoiding the need for the duckers to travel to market , or the London salesmen to collect the ducklings , this arrangement benefited all concerned , and ducking became very profitable . By 1870 the duck industry was bringing over £ 20 @,@ 000 per year into Aylesbury ; a typical ducker would make a profit of around £ 80 – £ 200 per year . 
 = = Developments in the late 19th century = = 
 In 1845 , the first National Poultry Show was held , at the Zoological Gardens in London ; one of the classes of poultry exhibited was " Aylesbury or other white variety " . The personal interest of Queen Victoria in poultry farming , and its inclusion in the Great Exhibition of 1851 , further raised public interest in poultry . From 1853 the Royal Agricultural Society and the Bath and West of England Society , the two most prominent agricultural societies in England , included poultry sections in their annual agricultural shows . This in turn caused smaller local poultry shows to develop across the country . 
 Breeders would choose potential exhibition ducks from among newly hatched ducklings in March and April , and they would be given a great deal of extra attention . They would be fed a carefully controlled diet to get them to the maximum weight , and would be allowed out for a few hours each day to keep them in as good a physical condition as possible . Before the show , their legs and feet would be washed , their bills trimmed with a knife and <unk> smooth , and their feathers brushed with linseed oil . While most breeders would give the ducks a healthy meal before the show to calm them , some breeders would force @-@ feed the ducks with sausage or worms , to get them to as heavy a weight as possible . Exhibition standards judged an Aylesbury duck primarily on size , shape and colour . This encouraged the breeding of larger ducks , with pronounced exaggerated keels , and loose baggy skin . By the beginning of the 20th century the Aylesbury duck had diverged into two separate strains , one bred for appearance and one for meat . 
 = = = Pekin ducks = = = 
 In 1873 the Pekin duck was introduced from China to Britain for the first time . Superficially similar in appearance to an Aylesbury duck , a Pekin is white with orange legs and bill , with its legs near the rear , giving it an upright stance while on land . Although not thought to have such a delicate flavour as the Aylesbury , the Pekin was hardier , a more prolific layer , fattened more quickly , and was roughly the same size as an Aylesbury at nine weeks . 
 Aylesbury ducks , meanwhile , were becoming inbred , meaning fertile eggs were scarcer and the ducks were more susceptible to disease . Exhibition standards had led to selection for an exaggerated keel by breeders , despite it being unpopular with dealers and consumers . Poultry show judges also admired the long neck and upright posture of Pekin ducks over the boat @-@ like stance of the Aylesbury . Some of the breeders in the Aylesbury area began to cross Pekin ducks with the pure Aylesbury strain . Although the Aylesbury @-@ Pekin cross ducks did not have the delicate flavour of the pure Aylesbury , they were hardier and much cheaper to raise . 
 Until the mid @-@ 19th century duck rearing was concentrated on the Duck End , but by the 1860s it had spread to many other towns and villages in the area , particularly Weston Turville and Haddenham . Contamination of Aylesbury 's soil by years of duck rearing , and new public health legislation which ended many traditional practices , caused the decline of the duck rearing industry in the Duck End , and by the 1890s the majority of Aylesbury ducks were raised in the villages rather than the town itself . Population shifts and the improved national rail network reduced the need to rear ducks near London , and large duck farms opened in Lancashire , Norfolk and Lincolnshire . Although the number of ducks raised nationwide continued to grow , between 1890 and 1900 the number of ducks raised in the Aylesbury area remained static , and from 1900 it began to drop . 
 = = Decline = = 
 By the time Beatrix Potter 's 1908 The Tale of Jemima Puddle @-@ Duck — about an Aylesbury duck although set in Cumbria — caused renewed interest in the breed , the Aylesbury duck was in steep decline . The duckers of Buckinghamshire had generally failed to introduce technological improvements such as the incubator , and inbreeding had dangerously weakened the breed . Meanwhile , the cost of duck food had risen fourfold over the 19th century , and from 1873 onwards competition from Pekin and Pekin cross ducks was undercutting Aylesbury ducks at the marketplace . 
 The First World War devastated the remaining duckers of Buckinghamshire . The price of duck food rose steeply while the demand for luxury foodstuffs fell , and wartime restructuring ended the beneficial financial arrangements with the railway companies . By the end of the war small @-@ scale duck rearing in the Aylesbury Vale had vanished , with duck raising dominated by a few large duck farms . Shortages of duck food in the Second World War caused further disruption to the industry , and almost all duck farming in the Aylesbury Vale ended . A 1950 " Aylesbury Duckling Day " campaign to boost the reputation of the Aylesbury duck had little effect ; by the end of the 1950s the last significant farms had closed , other than a single flock in Chesham owned by Mr L. T. Waller , and by 1966 there were no duck breeders or <unk> of any size remaining in Aylesbury . As of 2015 the Waller family 's farm in Chesham remains in business , the last surviving flock of pure Aylesbury meat ducks in the country . 
 Aylesbury ducks were imported into the United States in 1840 , although they never became a popular breed . They were , however , added to the American Poultry Association 's Standard of Perfection breeding guidelines in 1876 . As of 2013 , the breed was listed as critically endangered in the United States by The Livestock Conservancy . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Aylesbury duck remains a symbol of the town of Aylesbury . Aylesbury United F.C. are nicknamed " The Ducks " and include an Aylesbury duck on their club badge , and the town 's coat of arms includes an Aylesbury duck and plaited straw , representing the two historic industries of the town . The Aylesbury Brewery Company , now defunct , featured the Aylesbury duck as its logo , an example of which can still be seen at the Britannia pub . Duck Farm Court is a shopping area of modern Aylesbury located near the historic hamlet of California , close to one of the main breeding grounds for ducks in the town , and there have been two pubs in the town with the name " The Duck " in recent years ; one in <unk> that has since been demolished and one in Jackson Road that has recently been renamed . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 652 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 652 ( PA 652 ) is a 10 @.@ 559 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 16 @.@ 993 km ) east – west state highway located in the northeast Pennsylvania county of Wayne . The western terminus of the route is at U.S. Route 6 ( US 6 ) in the Texas Township community of Indian Orchard . The highways heads to the northeast , and reaches the eastern terminus at the New York @-@ Pennsylvania border in Damascus Township , where PA 652 crosses the Narrowsburg – Darbytown Bridge over the Delaware River and into New York , continuing as New York State Route 52 ( NY 52 ) and County Route 24 ( CR 24 ) in Sullivan County . 
 The highway originated as the easternmost stretch of US 106 when the United States Highway System was first put together in 1926 . The route , however , was assigned as a state highway in 1920 . PA 652 was once used south of the alignment , in the northern suburbs in Philadelphia . PA 652 remained on that alignment until 1946 , and in 1972 , the PA 652 designation was reassigned onto the US 106 alignment . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 652 begins at an intersection with US 6 ( Texas – Palmyra Highway / Grand Army of the Republic Highway ) in the village of Indian Orchard . PA 652 progresses northeast as a two @-@ lane local road through Texas Township as the Beach Lake Highway . Crossing into the village of Bethel , the route winds northeast through Berlin Township and enters Beach Lake . PA 652 is the main road through downtown Beach Lake , crossing an intersection with Milanville Road , which connects to the Skinners Falls @-@ Milanville Bridge . 
 After Beach Lake , PA 652 wanders northeast past Little Beach Pond and into Damascus Township . In Damascus , PA 652 enters a more wooded region of the county until Woodland Drive , where it becomes primarily residential once again . The route soon bends eastward then to the southeast at Kaiser Street , reaching the Delaware River as it enters Darbytown . Running eastward along the river , PA 652 reaches the Narrowsburg @-@ Darbytown Bridge , where it crosses the river into the state of New York , where it continues as NY 52 and CR 24 in Narrowsburg . 
 = = History = = 
 PA 652 was first assigned in 1928 to a series of local streets in the northwestern suburbs of Philadelphia . The southern terminus of the route was at the modern US 30 / Old Eagle School Road intersection on the Chester – Delaware county line near Devon to the west and Wayne to the east . PA 652 followed Old Eagle School Road north to King of Prussia , where the route turned east onto East <unk> Road . At the location of the modern US 422 / US 202 interchange , PA 652 turned north onto Guthrie Road , running alongside the right @-@ of @-@ way of what is now the US 422 expressway to North Gulph Road . PA 652 continued north on North Gulph Road to the Valley Forge National Historical Park , where it terminated at PA 23 . 
 In 1946 , PA 652 was transferred to the control of the local suburbs along its entire length , and control of the roads went to local highway departments . The portion of the route between Guthrie Road and PA 23 returned to state control in 1967 when PA 363 was routed onto North Gulph Road . 
 The current alignment of PA 652 was classified as a state highway as early as 1920 , nine years after the Sproul Road Bill was passed by the Pennsylvania State Legislature . The Sproul Road Bill also assigned the first state highways in Pennsylvania . There was no designation given to the highway . From 1926 to 1972 , the modern routing of PA 652 was part of US 106 . The road also carried a portion of PA 19 from 1927 to 1930 . On March 14 , 1972 , US 106 was decommissioned and replaced with the PA 652 designation between Indian Orchard and the Delaware River . Signs were changed by April of that year . 
 PA 652 has a consistent stretch of water crossings that helps put the highway together . The first bridge along the highway , built in 1925 , was the US 106 bridge spanning a tributary of the Delaware River . The concrete @-@ paved span was reconstructed in 1980 and crosses the tributary into New York on a 50 @.@ 85 feet ( 15 @.@ 50 m ) long span . The next bridge was the current Narrowsburg – Darbytown Bridge , built in 1954 over the Delaware . The bridge is structurally deficient according to the United States Department of Transportation , and is in need of replacement . The bridge is 425 feet ( 130 m ) long and made of steel . 
 The final two bridges were constructed in 1964 . The first was constructed for US 106 over Indian Orchard Brook . It is located about 500 feet ( 150 m ) east of State Route 2011 ( Poor Farm Road ) . It is a structurally deficient , 20 @.@ 99 feet ( 6 @.@ 40 m ) concrete bridge . There is no recorded estimate for replacement costs . The second bridge is also over Indian Orchard Brook , and is in Texas Township . The bridge is 41 @.@ 99 feet ( 12 @.@ 80 m ) long and built out of concrete , which handles an average of 6 @,@ 804 commuters a year . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = The Boat Race 1860 = 
 The 17th Boat Race took place on 31 March 1860 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . It was the first time in the history of the event that the race had to be restarted as a result of an obstruction . Cambridge won the event by one length , in the slowest time ever . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having defeated Cambridge as they sank in the previous year 's race . Cambridge led overall with nine wins to Oxford 's seven . 
 The challenge to race was sent by the president of the Cambridge University Boat Club to the president of the Oxford University Boat Club in the October term , with subsequent agreement to compete on 30 March 1860 . However , this was soon deemed unacceptable : the Cambridge crew were required to take examinations in the days prior and the tide on that day was " inconvenient " . As such , it was agreed to hold the race the following day , on 31 March . Oxford were initially considered the favourites , but after Cambridge 's practice rows , the odds evened . 
 Cambridge 's boat was built specifically for the race by Edward Searle of Simmons boat yard and was 57 @.@ 5 feet ( 17 @.@ 5 m ) in length . The Oxford vessel was the same as that used in the previous year 's race , a 54 @-@ foot ( 16 m ) long boat built by Matthew Taylor of Newcastle . The race was umpired by Joseph William Chitty who had rowed for Oxford twice in 1849 ( in the March and December races ) and the 1852 race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 Both crews were <unk> from pairs of trials eights . The Oxford crew weighed an average of 11 st 12 @.@ 5 lb ( 75 @.@ 3 kg ) , 2 @.@ 75 pounds ( 1 @.@ 2 kg ) per rower more than their Light Blue opposition . Each crew contained four members who had featured in the previous year 's race : Chaytor and Morland represented Cambridge again while Fairbairn and Hall competed in their third race . Meanwhile Morrison , Baxter and Robarts represented Oxford for the second time , with Risley making his third appearance in the event . 
 = = Race = = 
 The crowd lining the banks of the Thames was " immense " , while the weather was " drizzly and windy " . Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . Immediately after the starter , Edward Searle , had commanded the boats to commence , a wherry interrupted proceedings , blocking the boats ' passage and forcing Searle to declare a false start . It was the first time in Boat Race history that the event was required to be restarted . 
 Neither crew made a good start , but Cambridge took an early lead . Oxford had recovered to draw level by the " Star and Garter " pub and led by half a length by Craven Cottage . The Dark Blues were nearly clear by the " Crab Tree " pub and their cox Robarts steered across in an attempt to take clear water . Cambridge 's cox Morland called for a push to defend their course causing the crews to clash oars . They passed through the central pier of Hammersmith Bridge , with Cambridge holding a 3 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) lead , which they extended to half a length around Chiswick Reach . By Barnes Bridge the Light Blues held a length @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lead . They passed the " Ship Tavern " at Mortlake , winning by a length in a time of 26 minutes 5 seconds . As of 2014 , this remains the slowest winning time in the history of the event . 
 = Jim Umbricht = 
 James Umbricht ( September 17 , 1930 – April 8 , 1964 ) was an American professional baseball player . A right @-@ handed relief pitcher , he played Major League Baseball ( MLB ) between 1959 and 1963 for the Pittsburgh Pirates and Houston Colt .45s. 
 Umbricht was born in Chicago but grew up in Georgia . He started his professional career in 1953 , making the majors in 1959 . Over the next seasons , he alternated between teams , playing for the Pirates and that team 's farm system . Umbricht was drafted by the Colt .45s in 1962 , and became one of the National League 's top relief pitchers . 
 Diagnosed with malignant melanoma in his right leg in March 1963 , his comeback to baseball following surgery made national headlines and encouraged research on the disease . He spent the 1963 season as a relief pitcher , sometimes in excruciating pain . Umbricht 's health deteriorated soon afterwards and he died within six months , from complications from melanoma in a Houston area hospital at age 33 . His ashes were spread over the construction site of the Astrodome , the future home of the Colt .45s. The team retired Umbricht 's jersey number and wore black armbands for the 1964 season in his honor . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Umbricht was born in Chicago , and moved with his family to Atlanta in 1946 . Aspiring to be a professional baseball player , Umbricht practiced every day on a field by his house and became a multi @-@ sport star at Decatur High School in Decatur , Georgia . He attended the University of Georgia on a scholarship and played on the school 's baseball and basketball teams , becoming the captain of both for his senior year . He was named to the All @-@ Southeastern Conference first @-@ team as a shortstop in 1951 . 
 After graduating from Georgia , Umbricht participated in a local tryout camp for the Waycross Bears in the Class D Georgia – Florida League , a low @-@ level minor league affiliate in the Milwaukee Braves organization . He made the team , starting his professional baseball career as a pitcher and infielder . In 1953 , Umbricht pitched for the Bears in 10 games , starting in eight of them . Umbricht finished with a 4 – 3 win – loss record and a 2 @.@ 87 earned run average . 
 Umbricht missed the 1954 and 1955 seasons while serving in the United States Army , but pitched for a military team at Fort Carson in Colorado . After his discharge in 1956 , Umbricht played for the Baton Rouge Rebels of the Evangeline League ; he had a 15 – 15 Win – loss record in 32 games as the team finished with a 53 – 70 record , and led the league with 27 complete games . He was promoted to the Topeka Hawks of the Western League in 1957 , and had a 13 – 8 record with a 3 @.@ 24 earned run average in 28 games pitched . In 1958 he played for the Atlanta Crackers of the Southern Association . He went 6 – 10 with a 4 @.@ 06 earned run average in 55 games , mostly as a relief pitcher . Umbricht was traded to the Pittsburgh Pirates organization for Emil Panko prior to the 1959 season . The Pirates assigned Umbricht to their Triple @-@ A affiliate , the Salt Lake City Bees in the Pacific Coast League . While with the Bees , Umbricht had a 14 – 8 record with a 2 @.@ 78 earned run average in 47 games , mostly in relief . 
 = = Major League career = = 
 = = = Pittsburgh Pirates = = = 
 On the strength of his performance for the Bees , Umbricht was promoted to the Pirates roster near the end of the 1959 season . He appeared in only one game , a 7 – 6 loss to the Cincinnati Reds . He pitched seven innings , giving up five earned runs while striking out three . Umbricht left the game in position for the win , as the Pirates were leading 6 – 5 , but reliever Don Gross gave up two earned runs in the ninth inning for the blown save and the loss . 
 Two spots in the starting rotation were available by the time the Pirates started their 1960 season . At the beginning of spring training , Umbricht competed against fellow rookies Bennie Daniels and Joe Gibbon for a place . The Pirates began strongly in spring training , winning 11 in a row at one point . In a game against the Detroit Tigers , Umbricht combined with Daniels to throw a no @-@ hitter . Manager Danny Murtaugh was impressed with Umbricht 's pitching and expected him to become the Pirates ' fifth starter ( a combination of spot starter and reliever ) by opening day . He won the spot and in his first start of the season against the Reds on April 17 , he gave up six earned runs in 5 @.@ 1 innings , getting charged with the 11 – 3 loss . In his next start against the Philadelphia Phillies on April 21 , Umbricht had poor control , giving up three runs and walking five batters in 2 @.@ 1 innings . He made a last @-@ minute start against Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Don Drysdale on May 25 , after Pirates starting pitcher Bob Friend had a sore throat and could not play . Umbricht pitched five innings , striking out five batters , but gave up two critical second @-@ inning home runs to Frank Howard and John Roseboro and was charged with the loss . After an off @-@ day and a game postponed because of rain , the Pirates faced the Phillies at home on May 28 . After the game went to extra innings , Umbricht pitched the thirteenth inning . The Pirates won in the later half of the inning , earning Umbricht his first career win . 
 Umbricht continued to struggle in the bullpen and was demoted alongside Daniels on June 27 to the Columbus Jets of the International League as pitchers Tom Cheney and Earl Francis were promoted to the main squad . Between June 27 and September 9 , he appeared in 19 games , 15 of them starts , earning an 8 – 5 record , two shutouts and a 2 @.@ 50 earned run average . With his strong pitching performance at Columbus , Umbricht was re @-@ promoted to the main roster in early September to help the Pirates in their pennant race . On September 27 against the Reds , he struck out three batters in two innings in relief as the Pirates broke a team record by striking out 19 batters in a 16 @-@ inning victory . The Pirates managed to win the National League pennant , but he was not named in the final roster for the World Series , which the Pirates won in seven games . Overall during the 1960 season , Umbricht appeared in 17 games for the Pirates , compiling a 1 – 2 record with a 5 @.@ 09 earned run average and 26 strikeouts . 
 He appeared in one game during the 1961 season , pitching three innings in relief during a May 5 loss against the Dodgers . He was demoted alongside outfielder Román <unk> on May 10 as the Pirates had to trim their roster from 28 players to 25 per league rules . Umbricht was sent back to Columbus , where he spent the rest of the 1961 season as a full @-@ time starter . In 22 games , Umbricht had a 9 – 6 win – loss record with a 2 @.@ 35 earned run average in 142 innings pitched . 
 = = = Houston Colt .45s = = = 
 Umbricht was selected by the Houston Colt .45s with the 35th pick in the 1961 Major League Baseball expansion draft . Umbricht had become friends with Houston 's general manager Paul Richards when the two were at Waycross in 1953 , and Richards selected Umbricht to give him a better chance of pitching in the majors . With the Colts , Umbricht quickly became one of the best relief pitchers in the National League . Umbricht started the season on the Colts roster , but was demoted to the Oklahoma City 89ers of the American Association to make room for veteran pitcher Don McMahon . He appeared in 23 games for the 89ers , posting a 3 – 4 win – loss record with a 3 @.@ 39 earned run average , mostly in relief . He rejoined the Colts roster in the middle of the 1962 season as a relief specialist . He appeared in 34 games that season , earning a 4 – 0 win – loss record with a solid 2 @.@ 01 earned run average . He struck out 55 batters while walking only 17 . 
 Umbricht threw four pitches , a fastball , curveball , slider and the changeup . He was used primarily as a setup pitcher during his brief tenure with the Colts . According to former teammate and roommate Ken Johnson , Umbricht was used by the Colts mainly to control damage caused by starting pitchers after they were removed from games . In his five @-@ year Major League Baseball career , Umbricht compiled a 9 – 5 win – loss record , with 133 strikeouts , three saves and a 3 @.@ 06 earned run average in 88 games . 
 = = Cancer and early death = = 
 = = = Cancer diagnosis and 1963 season = = = 
 At the beginning of spring training for the 1963 season , Umbricht noticed a small black mole in his right leg , near the thigh while on a golf outing with Richards . Umbricht ignored the mole at first , but it grew at a rapid pace . Richards and team trainer Jim Ewell told Umbricht to have it checked by a doctor . A three @-@ inch section of the mole was removed for testing and a doctor confirmed it was a " black mole " tumor that had spread to his groin area . Ewell , the team trainer said , Umbricht " had the most wonderful attitude of anyone you 'll ever meet " . Umbricht 's cancer diagnosis shocked baseball and made national headlines . On March 7 , Umbricht underwent a six @-@ hour operation using perfusion to remove the tumor from his right leg . The perfusion technique was radical at the time , entering use as a surgical procedure not long before Umbricht 's surgery . After a month @-@ long hospital stay , Umbricht and his doctors told the media that he beat the cancer , crediting " early detection and good physical condition " , further stating that he " should have five or six good years left " in his baseball career . However , Umbricht learned that the doctors were unsure if the cancer surgery was a success , or even if it had been completely removed from his body . Even if it was , his chance of survival was slim at best . Upon hearing the news , Umbricht decided to keep it a secret outside his immediate family . 
 Umbricht wanted to return to pitch for the Colt .45s and was in uniform by opening day . Manager Harry Craft added Umbricht to the Colts ' active list prior to a May 9 game against Cincinnati , telling the Associated Press that the player was " anxious to get back to pitching " . He appeared in the sixth inning in a 13 – 3 loss , giving up four runs , including a home run to Frank Robinson in one inning of work . After the game , Umbricht said he felt " real good " despite the poor performance . The surgery took a toll on his leg : he required over 100 stitches , and blood seeped from the wound while he pitched at times . That year Umbricht posted a 4 – 3 win @-@ loss record and a 2 @.@ 61 earned run average in 35 games . He played his last game on September 29 , 1963 , the final day of the regular season . By that time , Umbricht 's cancer had started to spread throughout his body and he needed to be sedated at times because of the pain . In November , Umbricht learned that the cancer spread to his chest area and was incurable . He was released from his contract on December 16 due to his deteriorating health . The National League allowed the Colts to sign Umbricht to a scout contract given the circumstances , with the proviso that it would become a player contract if he rejoined the active roster . 
 = = = Final months and death = = = 
 By early 1964 , Umbricht was constantly in and out of hospital for further treatment , but was only given a few months to live . When he was not hospitalized , Umbricht played golf and attended baseball dinners in his honor , often for a " most courageous athlete " award ceremony . Umbricht did not travel to Cocoa Beach for the Colts ' spring training camp in late February . He returned to the hospital permanently on March 16 , where his health steadily declined after a third operation . During his final hospital stay , the Colts ' management , his family and the hospital staff agreed not to release any further details about his illness , though word had leaked that he was dying . He remained optimistic that he would beat the illness until his final days , stating that " everything will be ok " in an interview with United Press International sports editor Milton Richman . Umbricht succumbed to the disease on April 8 , 1964 , in the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center . Umbricht 's death came on the eve of the Colts ' 1964 season . Several members of the team attended the funeral ; manager Harry Craft , coach Lum Harris and teammate Dick Farrell were among the six pallbearers . Teammate Russ <unk> , who in the off @-@ season was a Methodist preacher , gave the eulogy during the service , and Umbricht 's body was cremated . Construction of the Astrodome , the Colts ' future ballpark had begun a few weeks before Umbricht 's death . His family decided to spread his ashes on its grounds , so the new ballpark " could be his headstone " . After the funeral service , Umbricht 's brother Ed flew a plane over the construction site and scattered his ashes . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 The day after Umbricht 's death , the Colts decided to honor their teammate by wearing black armbands for the entire 1964 season . Umbricht 's uniform number ( 32 ) was immediately retired by the team ; it was the first time the club retired a uniform number , and only the ninth time in Major League history a number was retired . In the Colts ' opening @-@ day match against the Cincinnati Reds , starting pitcher Ken Johnson dedicated his victory in Umbricht 's memory . The Astros ' MVP award was also named in his honor . The back of Umbricht 's 1964 Topps baseball card was updated to mention his death shortly before printing . The retirement of Umbricht 's number received some criticism , however . Former teammate Jimmy Wynn wrote in his autobiography that Walt Bond , a former Astros player who was African @-@ American , died from leukemia while he was still active . His jersey number was not retired by the club after his death , although he appeared in more games for the Astros than Umbricht . ( It should be noted , however , that Bond ended his career not with Houston but as a member of the Minnesota Twins . ) Journalists criticizing the retirement of numbers sometimes use Umbricht as an example of someone whose number was retired but who is unfamiliar to baseball fans . 
 Umbricht 's death from melanoma helped alert the general public about the disease . Former Los Angeles Rams linebacker Jack Pardee credited Umbricht 's battle with melanoma for saving his life in 1965 . Pardee , a Pro Bowl linebacker , had been ignoring a mole on his armpit . After hearing of Umbricht 's battle with cancer , and that his mole was similar to Umbricht 's , he went to the team doctor , who diagnosed him with melanoma . Although Pardee 's melanoma had also spread throughout his body , he made a complete recovery . 
 = Eric Gascoigne Robinson = 
 Rear Admiral Eric Gascoigne Robinson VC , OBE ( 16 May 1882 – 20 August 1965 ) was a Royal Navy officer and an English recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces . He earned his award by going ashore and single @-@ handedly destroying a Turkish naval gun battery while a lieutenant commander with the fleet stationed off the Dardanelles during the Gallipoli campaign in the First World War . 
 After these exploits , he was badly wounded on the front line on the Gallipoli Peninsula , but recovered and served continuously for the remainder of the war and into the Russian Civil War . In 1939 aged 57 , he again volunteered for military service and spent three more years at sea , commanding convoys during the Battle of the Atlantic . During his lengthy career , Robinson remained a highly regarded officer who had served through four wars . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Eric Gascoigne Robinson was born in 1882 at Greenwich in South @-@ East London to John Lovell Robinson and Louisa Aveline Gascoigne . John was the chaplain of the Royal Naval College at Greenwich and Eric 's youth was spent in preparation for a life at sea . Robinson joined HMS Britannia aged just fifteen in 1897 and rapidly progressed to the battleship HMS Majestic and then the first class protected cruiser HMS Endymion , in which he took part in suppressing the Boxer Rebellion in China . It was here , aged 18 , that he saw his first action with the relief force , being wounded in action , mentioned in despatches and gaining a reputation as a daring and resourceful officer . He remained in China serving on a Yangtze gunboat for several years before returning to England and becoming a torpedo specialist at HMS Vernon , Portsmouth , in 1907 . 
 In 1910 , Robinson was promoted to Lieutenant Commander and spent his time between HMS Vernon , the depot ship HMS Thames and the cruisers HMS Blenheim and HMS Amethyst on active service . In 1913 , he married Edith Gladys <unk> , with whom he had three children . Robinson was slightly injured in a train accident shortly after his wedding , but soon recovered and was dispatched to the Mediterranean Sea at the outbreak of the First World War on board the old battleship HMS Vengeance . 
 = = Gallipoli campaign and the Victoria Cross = = 
 The exploit in his Victoria Cross nomination was the result of Robinson 's close friendship and working relationship with another aggressive officer , Roger Keyes , whom he had first met in China fifteen years before . Keyes was asked by his superior , Admiral John de Robeck , to prepare an assault on the Turkish gun battery at <unk> ( also known as Achilles ' Tomb ) , a position between Kum Kale and Yeni <unk> on the southern shore of the Dardanelles . This position had withstood fire from the battleships of the Allied fleet during the preceding weeks . Robinson was suggested as the leader of a commando force of sailors and Royal Marines tasked with destroying the battery and withdrawing in good order . 
 Robinson accepted the mission without hesitation . His force landed undetected early in the morning of 26 February , destroyed two small artillery pieces and made fast progress towards the main battery before being pinned down by Turkish snipers in the mid @-@ afternoon . The white naval uniforms of the sailors proved an easy target for the Turks and casualties mounted as Turkish reinforcements were brought up to cut off the raiding party . Instead of withdrawing in the face of this threat , Robinson marched his men through gullies and came out close to a small rise behind the main battery . The open ground of the rise was covered by several Turkish snipers , but realising the importance of removing the artillery overlooking the sea passage , Robinson delegated command of the party to a junior officer and made the climb alone , dodging bullets in his white uniform until he crested the rise unhurt , emerging a few minutes later and starting back apparently unconcerned by the increasingly heavy gunfire directed at him . He was said to be " strolling around . . . under heavy rifle fire . . . like a sparrow enjoying a bath from a garden hose " . The battery had been ungarrisoned , and Robinson was able to lay fuses which destroyed the large 9 @.@ 4 " main gun and two anti @-@ aircraft emplacements within the position . Withdrawing in good order , Robinson evaded the Turkish reinforcements and then directed gunfire from the fleet onto their positions , including a force garrisoning an ancient tomb , inflicting heavy casualties . An immediate recommendation for the Victoria Cross was put forward by Admiral de Robeck who had observed proceedings from HMS Queen Elizabeth offshore . 
 During March , in preparation for the landings on the peninsula , Robinson led four sorties into the extensive sea minefields around the beaches and bays of Gallipoli . On one of these , his minesweeper was struck by small calibre shells 84 times and the other operations were scarcely less dangerous but , in spite of the Turkish resistance , Robinson was able to clear wide lanes for the invasion forces . 
 = = = E15 mission = = = 
 Robinson volunteered in April for an even more dangerous mission , following the Turkish capture of submarine HMS E15 which had stranded below the guns of Fort Dardanus near <unk> Point . All efforts to destroy this craft had so far failed and it was considered vital for naval morale that it was not salvaged by the enemy . Robinson took command of two picket boats from the battleships HMS Triumph and HMS Majestic , each armed with two torpedoes mounted on the gunwales in dropping gear , and entered the Dardanelles under cover of darkness on 18 April . Caught in a blaze of searchlights , and under heavy fire from the Turkish artillery and machine guns , both boats miraculously arrived unscathed . A carelessly @-@ directed Turkish searchlight briefly illuminated E15 . The boat from HMS Majestic under the command of Lt Goodwin seized the opportunity and attacked . The first torpedo missed , and seconds later the boat was struck by a shell that blew away much of her stern , mortally wounding one of her crew and causing her irreparable damage . Undeterred , Goodwin went in again and scored a direct hit with his second torpedo , just forward of the conning tower , wrecking the submarine . 
 Observing his consort 's plight , Robinson did not hesitate , steaming to the stricken vessel and rescuing her crew before escaping downstream to Mudros . It was estimated that the Turks fired at least 500 heavy calibre rounds of ammunition at the two boats in just a few minutes . A German officer present noted that " I have never on the course of the war seen an attack carried out with such pluck and fearlessness " . It has also been commented that this action should have brought Robinson a second Victoria Cross , but he was promoted to Commander by special decree instead . 
 = = = Later war service = = = 
 In August , Robinson was sent to Anzac Cove as a naval liaison officer and on his second day there , was badly wounded near the front line , forcing his evacuation to England , where King George V presented him with his medal at Buckingham Palace . Returned to the Mediterranean in December 1915 following his recuperation , he took over the coastal monitor HMS M21 , in which he shelled Turkish positions throughout Egypt and Palestine and was awarded another mention in despatches and the Egyptian Order of the Nile , 4th Class . Returning to England in the summer of 1917 , he narrowly missed selection for Keyes 's operations against Zeebrugge and Ostend owing to his war wounds , and instead trained crews of coastal torpedo boats , a role which led to a distant posting in the Caspian Sea during the Russian Civil War , fighting the Bolshevik forces along the Russian coastline . Robinson commanded a squadron of coastal torpedo boats in the Caspian and forced the surrender of several enemy forts through aggressive tactics . These achievements would later win him the Imperial Russian Order of St. Anne , 2nd Class . His most notable achievement at this time was leading a small coastal motor boat inside the harbour of Fort Alexandrovsk , where he sank a barge and prompted a mass surrender from the garrison . 
 = = Peacetime and Second World War service = = 
 Following this period of extended service , Robinson was brought home , appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire by the King for his Caspian Sea service , promoted again to Captain and posted to HMS Iron Duke . Robinson then served in a number of training establishments and dockyards , as well as a brief stint with the Far East Fleet , during which he received the Japanese Order of the Sacred Treasure , Third Class for his services . In 1925 , he was inducted into the Freemasons and remained a prominent member of the Navy Lodge for the rest of his life . The organisation still commemorates him in their publications . He retired at age 51 in 1933 as a rear @-@ admiral , but when the Second World War broke out , Robinson immediately offered his services and for three years , commanded convoys across the Atlantic Ocean . For this service , he was later presented with the Norwegian King Haakon VII 's Freedom Cross . Eventually a bout of ill @-@ health caused by a combination of the strain of long service , his age , and the death of his son , Midshipman Edward <unk> Robinson , in the sinking of the cruiser HMS Neptune in December 1941 , prompted a second retirement in 1942 . 
 = = Retirement and death = = 
 Robinson settled in the village of <unk> , near Petersfield in east Hampshire . He died peacefully at Haslar Naval Hospital , Gosport , on 20 August 1965 and was laid to rest at St John 's , the village church he had served for 20 years as warden . For unknown reasons , his grave was without a headstone until 1998 , although a large plaque to him was dedicated by his sister in 1969 and surmounts the altar . Following investigations by the Naval VC Association , his grave was discovered and a Commonwealth War Graves Commission headstone erected . At the dedication ceremony , attended by over 150 friends , relatives , Masons and servicemen , Admiral Derek <unk> gave the eulogy which stated : " The admiral was a hero , but more importantly he was a naval man from the finest mould . Now at last we can accord him the dignity he deserves . " 
 = Peter Evans ( swimmer ) = 
 Peter Maxwell Evans ( born 1 August 1961 ) is an Australian breaststroke swimmer of the 1980s , who won four Olympic medals , most notably a gold in the 4 × 100 m medley relay at the 1980 Moscow Olympics as part of the Quietly Confident Quartet . He also won consecutive bronze medals in the 100 m breaststroke at the 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics . 
 The son of prominent Western Australian businessman and politician Max Evans , Evans had a late start to his swimming career , making his debut at the Australian championships aged 17 . Despite placing second in the 100 m breaststroke , he was not selected for Australia , and instead travelled to the United Kingdom to train under David Haller . During this period , he quickly improved his times and rose from outside the top 200 into the top 25 in the world rankings . Evans returned to Australia in 1980 and qualified for the Olympics in both the 100 m and 200 m breaststroke . A sprinter , he won the 100 m in an Australian record time and showed a preference for shorter events , which required less training mileage . Evans gained a reputation for often doing fewer training laps than his coach asked of him . Having rebuffed Australian government pressure to boycott the Moscow Olympics in response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan , Evans won bronze in the 100 m breaststroke . His career peak came in the 4 × 100 m medley relay , when he <unk> his opponents in the breaststroke leg of the relay , bringing Australia into contention for its eventual win , which remains the only time that the United States has not won the event at Olympic level . 
 After the Olympics , Evans moved to the United States to study business and compete for the University of Arizona . He was less successful in the short @-@ course format used at college level , which placed more reliance on efficient turns . Evans returned to Australia for the 1982 Commonwealth Games in Brisbane , winning silver in the 100 m breaststroke and gold in the medley relay . He competed in his second Olympics in Los Angeles in 1984 , winning bronze in both the 100 m breaststroke and the medley relay . Evans retired after missing selection for the 1986 Commonwealth Games and attempted to follow his father into politics . He unsuccessfully stood as the candidate for the Liberal Party of Australia in the electoral district of Perth at the 1986 state election , before pursuing a career in business . 
 = = Early years = = 
 The second of four children , Evans was born into an affluent family in Perth , Western Australia . His father Max was a chartered accountant who went on to become a politician for the Liberal Party in the state 's Upper House . Max was the president of the Western Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and a senior partner in the accounting firm founded by Sir Charles Court , then premier of Western Australia , who was credited with modernising the state and transforming its lucrative mining industry . Max was an honorary member of the Australian Chamber of Commerce . The Evans family had a sporting pedigree . Max had been a state champion athletics sprinter at youth level and won a gold , a silver and three bronze medals as part of Western Australian relay teams at the Australian Championships . Evans ' mother Barbara , a physiotherapist , was a capable swimmer and won a half @-@ blue in netball at the University of Western Australia . 
 Evans attended the exclusive Scotch College in Perth for his entire primary and high school years . He was initially a self @-@ taught swimmer , having observed his father in the water . He recalled that " As I didn 't like to get up early , I didn 't get swim instruction until my sixth grade at Scotch College " . Evans later trained and competed for the school swimming team in summer as well as the field hockey team . Evans enjoyed success in all four strokes at school level , but was most proficient at breaststroke and chose to specialise in it , commenting that " I 'd rather be good at one stroke than mediocre in four " . Thereafter , he was undefeated in breaststroke at school level . Evans learned the " whip kick " from Ian Dickson , brother of Olympic freestyle swimming medallist David Dickson . Evans later honed his endurance ability under Kevin Duff and his sprinting ability under Bernie Mulroy . 
 = = National debut = = 
 In November 1978 , Evans broke the Western Australian record for the 100 m breaststroke during his final year at school . He and his father decided that he should step up his swimming career , and Evans entered the 1979 Australian Championships in Perth . Despite only four weeks of solid training leading up to the meet , Evans came second to Lindsay Spencer . However , Evans was omitted from the Australian squad that toured Britain because he was an unknown swimmer . After the meet , Evans vowed to become an elite swimmer and Olympian . A week later , Evans travelled to England to train at Crystal Palace in London under David Haller , coach of future Olympic breaststroke gold medallist Duncan Goodhew . Evans did so feeling that there was insufficient coaching support for breaststrokers in Australia . In three months of training in London , Evans had risen up the breaststroke rankings from outside the top 200 into the top 25 . He returned to Australia and won selection in the national team for the FINA ( Fédération Internationale de Natation ) World Cup in Japan , before returning to London for more training . 
 Evans returned to Australia in 1980 to compete at the Australian Championships , which doubled as the Olympic trials . His sojourn in the United Kingdom meant that he was a virtual unknown in his home country . He set a national record in winning the 100 m breaststroke in a time of 1 m 4 @.@ 80 s and also qualified for his less preferred 200 m event . During the Olympic training camp in Brisbane , the Australian coaches tried to get Evans to cover more mileage at training . Evans ' teammates recalled him stopping during a pool session and emphatically proclaiming that " Work is a poor substitute for talent " . In 2000 , more than a decade after his retirement , he was still using this slogan . Evans was confident in his own training methods and refused to bend to the coaches . His teammate Mark Tonelli said that Evans " knew what he was capable of and as far as he was concerned , he was capable of anything " . 
 = = 1980 Moscow Olympics = = 
 Having qualified to swim for Australia , another obstacle arose with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan , which resulted in a boycott of the Games by a large part of the Western world , led by the United States . The Australian prime minister , Malcolm Fraser , was also the patron of the Australian Olympic Committee , and significant political pressure came to bear on the athletes to boycott the Games . Evans ' relay team @-@ mate Tonelli believed that only the sportspeople would suffer from a boycott and that trade relations would continue unabated . He took a leadership role among the athletes to fight for their right to compete and publicise their cause among the Australian public . Evans was fully supportive of Tonelli 's campaign , reflecting that " We were political tools , and the only ones to suffer would be us . " He rhetorically asked : " Do you really think that if we didn 't go someone would come up to us after the Games and pat us on the back for not going ? " 
 Having arrived in Moscow , Evans ' first event was the 100 m breaststroke , which the Soviets were favoured to win . Evans ' former flat @-@ mate and training partner Goodhew was another of the favourites . Evans placed equal first in his heat and advanced to the final as the fourth @-@ fastest qualifier , along with Goodhew , two Soviets and fellow Australian Spencer . In a hard @-@ fought final , Goodhew won the gold medal , while Evans narrowly missed out on silver , finishing 0 @.@ 14 s behind the Soviet Union 's Arsens Miskarovs to claim bronze in a time of 1 m 3 @.@ 96 s . Evans was just 0 @.@ 04 s ahead of Aleksandr <unk> , another swimmer from the host nation . Reflecting on the race , Evans felt that his lack of experience compared with Goodhew was a factor in his loss . Evans felt that Goodhew had " psyched [ him ] out " . Evans was less successful in the 200 m — not his preferred distance . He came fourth in his heat in a time of 2 m 26 @.@ 62 s , which saw him eliminated with the 12th @-@ fastest time , some three seconds slower than what was needed to make the final . 
 = = = Relay victory = = = 
 The 4 × 100 m medley relay was the focal point of Evans ' Moscow campaign . The event had always been won by the United States since its inception at Olympic level in 1960 , and their boycott had opened up the field in the event . In the five times the event had been contested , Australia 's best result was a silver in the inaugural race . A bronze in 1964 was the only other medal success , and the 1976 edition of the medley relay had seen Australia eliminated in the heats . This time , Australia was regarded as a medal chance , but were not seen as the main threats — Sweden , Great Britain and the Soviet Union were the most favoured teams to win . The hosts ' team included the silver medallists in the 100 m backstroke and breaststroke , and their butterflyer had come fifth . Later , their freestyler would place fourth . The British had Goodhew , the breaststroke gold medallist , while Sweden 's butterflyer and backstroker had won their respective events and their freestyle swimmer would come second in the 100 m . On paper , Australia 's team paled in comparison . Neil Brooks , the freestyler , would come 14th overall after an asthma attack , and Evans was the only individual medallist in the corresponding individual event . Mark Kerry had been eliminated in the backstroke semifinals , while Tonelli was swimming as a makeshift butterflyer . Adding to the pressure was the fact that Australia had won no gold medals at the 1976 Olympics in any sport , and were yet to win one in Moscow , so the public were still awaiting their first victory since Munich in 1972 . Coming into the Olympics , Australia were ranked seventh out of the 13 competing countries . 
 Australia 's prospects improved after the morning heats in which Sweden was disqualified . Evans took the opportunity to attempt to regain the psychological ascendancy from Goodhew , confronting him privately and stating that " we will win it " . Evans felt that his posturing had shaken Goodhew . Tonelli , the eldest swimmer in the quartet at the age of 23 , convened the team as its de facto leader . He asked his team @-@ mates to commit to swimming their legs in a certain time ; Kerry vowed to swim the backstroke in 57 s , Evans the breaststroke in 63 s flat , Tonelli the butterfly in 54 s and Brooks promised to anchor the team in 49 @.@ 8 s , even though he had never gone faster than 51 s . Tonelli named the foursome as the Quietly Confident Quartet , and they exhibited a quiet confidence as they lined up for the race . 
 Kerry led off in a faster time than he had clocked in the individual event , but it was still two seconds slower than his personal best time of 57 @.@ 87 s , leaving Australia in fourth place at the end of the first leg . Evans then swam a personal best of 63 @.@ 01 s to put Australia in second place , almost level with the host nation at the halfway mark . Evans had out @-@ split Goodhew by 0 @.@ 8 s and <unk> by 0 @.@ 5 s . Tonelli then swam his leg in 54 @.@ 94 s , almost two seconds faster than he had ever done before . Tonelli began to lose ground in the last 50 m and was a bodylength behind until a late surge brought him to within a metre of the lead by the end of his leg . Brooks then performed a powerful , well @-@ timed dive and surfaced almost even with his Soviet counterpart . He had drawn level by the halfway mark and made a superior turn to take the lead . The Soviet freestyler pulled level at the 25 m mark before Brooks again sprinted away to seal an Australian victory by 0 @.@ 22 s . Brooks had finished his leg in 49 @.@ 86 s as he had vowed to his teammates . The time of 3 m 45 @.@ 70 s sealed Australia 's first @-@ ever win in a medley relay at the Olympics , for men or women . The team then made a celebratory dive into the pool and were interviewed at the poolside . Evans said that the relay " was unbelievable , but it was all so logical . I was so deliriously happy that I couldn 't stop talking . " 
 Upon returning to Australia , Evans and Brooks were raucously received in their hometown of Perth . They were denied a civic reception by the Lord Mayor of the City of Perth , who supported an Olympic boycott over Afghanistan , but the Lord Mayor of Fremantle instead hosted a reception . Evans received congratulations from Prime Minister Fraser . In 2000 , Evans quipped that " We 're the Vietnam vets of the Olympic movement " . In the same year , Evans and the other members of the quartet were each awarded the Australian Sports Medal for their victory in Moscow . 
 = = US college career = = 
 A few weeks before the Olympics , Evans had signed a deal with the University of Arizona and he went there to study and swim after the Olympics . Evans was to spend five years in Arizona studying for a BA in business . He regarded his American experience as a crucial component of his development : " I got a good education , but above all I learned about myself " . The American laissez faire attitude — which revolved around the individual 's self @-@ determination — sat well with Evans ' outlook on life . He often clashed with Arizona swimming coach Dick <unk> , who was regarded as a hard taskmaster . The pair clashed over the training regime ; <unk> insisted that Evans increase his mileage , something that the student strongly resisted . Evans was an All @-@ American for four years , but he struggled in the short @-@ course pools used in the college system . Short @-@ course pools — which are only half the length — place more emphasis on a swimmer 's turning ability , which was the Australian 's weakness . Despite his ranking as third in the world at the Olympics , which are swum in long @-@ course pools , Evans was ranked only fifth in the college system . 
 The Australian Swimming Union ( ASU ) did not recognise times that had been recorded in short @-@ course pools in the United States , so Evans was forced to return for the Australian Championships to qualify for the 1982 Commonwealth Games held in Brisbane . Despite winning neither of the breaststroke events , Evans successfully earned selection and lined up at the Commonwealth Games in the 100 m and 200 m breaststroke and the 4 × 100 m medley relay . In his favoured 100 m event , Evans won bronze , having been led home by Adrian Moorhouse of England and Canada 's Victor Davis . In the 200 m event , Evans came fourth , almost four seconds behind the victorious Davis . He then combined with David Orbell , Jon Sieben and Brooks to win the medley relay in a Commonwealth Games record time . Canada reached the wall far ahead of Australia , but were disqualified for a premature changeover . 
 = = International farewell = = 
 After the games , Evans returned to the United States to continue his studies and collegiate swimming career . Before the 1984 Olympics , Evans travelled to Hong Kong to train with Haller , who was coaching the British colony 's swimming team . Evans revitalised himself under his favourite coach and returned to his old style of sprinting . However , he twisted his ankle later in Perth and missed some training time . He won the Australian 100 m breaststroke championship to qualify for the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles , and returned to Arizona to continue training . His Olympic campaign was placed in jeopardy when the ASU threatened to remove Evans from the team for skipping their training camp in Australia . The threat was withdrawn after Evans ' father confronted the ASU and pointed out that his son was training , although in a different location . Before the Games , Evans joined the Australians for their final training camp at Stanford University in California . Evans arrived in Los Angeles with the same program as in Moscow ; he entered both breaststroke events and the medley relay . Evans started brightly to win his heat of the 100 m breaststroke in an Olympic record time of 1 m 2 @.@ 87 s . His new mark did not last long — John Moffet broke it in a later heat to relegate Evans to the second @-@ fastest qualifying time . 
 Nevertheless , their opponents were able to lift and the final saw Steve Lundquist of the United States set a new world record of 1 m 1 @.@ 65 s ; Evans took bronze , 0 @.@ 98 s behind silver medallist Davis . Evans was unable to maintain the pace that he had set in the heats , clocking a time 0 @.@ 10 s slower . In the 200 m , Evans came second in his heat but was not fast enough to make the final , swimming 1 @.@ 47 s slower than the slowest qualifier to finish 17th . The final event for Evans was the 4 × 100 m medley relay . Evans was joined by Kerry , while Glenn Buchanan and Mark Stockwell swum the butterfly and freestyle respectively . The Americans were overwhelming favourites , boasting the gold medallists in three of the respective individual events . The hosts easily won the gold by almost four seconds ; Evans and the Australians were third , relegated from the silver medal by just 0 @.@ 02 s by the Canadian team , having been in the bronze medal position at every change . Evans recorded the second @-@ fastest breaststroke split , slower than Lundquist , but quicker than the rest , including Davis . 
 After the Olympics , Evans returned to Arizona and resumed his studies . In 1985 , he represented Australia at the World University Games in Kobe , Japan . The following year , he attempted to qualify for the 1986 Commonwealth Games in Edinburgh after only ten days training . He made the qualifying time , but was omitted . Evans later stated that he felt his admission of having only trained for ten days had lowered his standing in the eyes of the selectors . As a result of being overlooked , Evans retired from competitive swimming . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In early 1986 , Evans won preselection for the Liberal Party in the electoral district of Perth . He contested the seat in the state election , but lost despite a four percent swing against the Australian Labor Party . Evans then travelled around the world studying international market systems , before working in fund management and international investment . He said of his swimming career : " It 's not that serious . It 's only a race . There 's a lot more to be happy and proud for and proud of . " 
 = Bruce Dickinson = 
 Paul Bruce Dickinson ( born 7 August 1958 ) , known professionally as Bruce Dickinson , is an English singer , songwriter , musician , airline pilot , author and broadcaster . He is best known as the lead singer of the heavy metal band Iron Maiden and is renowned for his wide @-@ ranging operatic vocal style and energetic stage presence . 
 Born in Worksop , Nottinghamshire , Dickinson began his career in music fronting small pub bands in the 1970s while attending school in Sheffield and university in London . In 1979 , he joined the new wave of British heavy metal band Samson , with whom he gained some popularity under the stage name " Bruce Bruce " and performed on two studio records . He left Samson in 1981 to join Iron Maiden , replacing Paul Di 'Anno , and debuted on their 1982 album The Number of the Beast . During his first tenure in the band , they issued a series of US and UK platinum and gold albums in the 1980s . 
 Dickinson quit Iron Maiden in 1993 ( being replaced by Blaze Bayley ) in order to pursue his solo career , which saw him experiment with a wide variety of heavy metal and rock styles . He rejoined the band in 1999 , along with guitarist Adrian Smith , with whom he has released five subsequent studio albums . Since his return to Iron Maiden , he issued one further solo record in 2005 , Tyranny of Souls . His younger cousin , Rob Dickinson , is the former lead singer of British alternative rock band Catherine Wheel , while his son , Austin , fronted the metalcore band Rise to Remain . 
 Outside his career in music , Dickinson is well known for his wide variety of other pursuits . Most notably , he undertook a career as a commercial pilot for Astraeus Airlines , which led to a number of media @-@ reported ventures such as captaining Iron Maiden 's converted charter aeroplane , Ed Force One , during their world tours . Following Astraeus ' closure , he created his own aircraft maintenance and pilot training company in 2012 , Cardiff Aviation . Dickinson presented his own radio show on BBC Radio 6 Music from 2002 – 2010 , and has also hosted television documentaries , authored novels and film scripts , created a successful beer with Robinsons Brewery and competed at fencing internationally . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Paul Bruce Dickinson was born in Worksop , Nottinghamshire . His mother , Sonia , worked part @-@ time in a shoe shop , and his father , Bruce , was a mechanic in the army . Dickinson 's birth hurried the young couple , then just teenagers , into marriage . Initially , he was brought up by his grandparents ; his grandfather was a coal @-@ face worker at the local colliery and his grandmother was a housewife . This is referred to in his song " Born In ' 58 " from the album Tattooed Millionaire . 
 Dickinson started school at Manton Primary in Worksop while his parents moved away to Sheffield . Soon afterwards , when he was six , he was also despatched to Sheffield , where he attended a primary school in Manor Top . After six months , his parents decided to move him to a small private school called <unk> Vale Junior . Due to constant moving , Dickinson states that this period of his life taught him to be self @-@ reliant as he was unable to make close friends . Dickinson has a younger sister , professional <unk> Helena <unk> , who was born in 1963 . He tried to isolate himself from her as much as he could when he was young , supposedly out of spite because she , unlike him , was a planned pregnancy and birth . 
 Dickinson 's first musical experience was dancing in his grandparents ' front room to Chubby Checker 's " The Twist " , when he still lived with them in Worksop . The first record Dickinson recalls owning was The Beatles single " She Loves You " , which he managed to persuade his grandfather to buy him , which made him more interested in music . He tried to play an acoustic guitar belonging to his father , but it blistered his fingers . 
 By the time he moved to Sheffield , Dickinson 's parents were earning a good living from buying property , refurbishing it and then selling it for a profit . As a result , much of Dickinson 's childhood was spent living on a building site , until his parents bought a boarding house and a bankrupt garage where his father began selling second @-@ hand cars . The income from their business success gave them the opportunity to give Dickinson — then 13 years old — a boarding school education and they chose Oundle , a public school in Northamptonshire . Dickinson was not opposed to moving away from home because he had not built " any real attachment " to his parents , having been raised by his grandparents in Worksop until he was six . 
 At Oundle , Dickinson was picked on and routinely bullied by the older boys of Sidney House , the boarding house that he belonged to , which he described as " like systematic torture " and meant that he became an outsider . His interests at Oundle were often military ; he co @-@ founded the school wargames society with Mike Jordan , and he rose to a position of some power in the school 's cadet force , with which he was allowed to handle live ammunition , which he used to create explosions as booby @-@ traps . 
 Oundle was where Dickinson became attracted to hard rock , after hearing Deep Purple 's " Child In Time " being played in another student 's room . As a result , the first album he ever bought was Deep Purple 's In Rock , which created his interest in rock music . After In Rock , he went on to buy Black Sabbath 's debut , Jethro Tull 's Aqualung and <unk> by Emerson , Lake & Palmer . Every term , a band would play at the school , the first of these which Dickinson saw was called Wild Turkey , featuring former Jethro Tull bassist Glenn Cornick . After that , he saw Van der Graaf Generator and Arthur Brown . 
 Dickinson initially wanted to play the drums , later obtaining a pair of bongo drums from the music room for practice . He remembers playing " Let It Be " with his friend Mike Jordan , during which Dickinson discovered his singing voice while encouraging Jordan to sing the high @-@ notes . Shortly afterwards Dickinson was expelled from Oundle for participating in a prank in which he urinated in the headmaster 's dinner . 
 Returning home to Sheffield in 1976 , Dickinson enrolled at King Edward VII School , at which he joined his first band . He had overheard two other pupils talking about their band and that they needed a singer and so volunteered immediately . They rehearsed in the garage of the drummer 's father , and the band were impressed by Dickinson 's singing , encouraging him to buy his first microphone . Their first gig took place at the Broadfield Tavern in Sheffield . Originally called " Paradox " , the band changed their name on Dickinson 's suggestion to " Styx " , unaware of the American act with the same name . They made local newspaper headlines when a steel worker was awoken by their performance and tried to smash the band 's drum kit . Soon afterwards the band split up . 
 = = University = = 
 After leaving school with A @-@ levels in English , History and Economics , Dickinson confessed , " I didn 't really know what I wanted to do . " The first thing he did was join the Territorial Army for six months . Although he enjoyed his time in the TA , Dickinson realised that it was not a career choice , and so he applied for a place to read history at Queen Mary College , in London 's East End . His parents wanted him in the army , but he told them that he wanted to get a degree first , which acted as his " cover story " , and immediately began playing in bands . 
 At university , Dickinson got involved in the Entertainments Committee : " one day you 'd be a roadie for The Jam , the next you 'd be putting up the Stonehenge backdrop for Hawkwind or whatever . " In 1977 , Dickinson met Paul " Noddy " White , a multi @-@ instrumentalist who owned a PA and other equipment , with whom Dickinson , along with drummer Steve Jones , would form a band together called Speed . According to Dickinson , the band was called Speed because of the way in which they played , rather than a reference to drug @-@ taking . In Speed , Dickinson began writing his own material after White taught him how to play three chords on the guitar . 
 Although Speed would play several gigs at the Green Man pub in Plumstead , the band did not last long , but it encouraged Dickinson to continue to work towards being a musician . Dickinson spotted an advertisement in Melody Maker with the caption " Singer wanted for recording project " and replied immediately . He recorded a demo tape and sent it with a note which read : " By the way , if you think the singing 's crap , there 's some John Cleese stuff recorded on the other side you might find amusing . " They liked what they heard and invited Dickinson down to the studio to make " Dracula " , the first song he would ever record , with a band called " Shots " , formed by two brothers , Phil and Doug Siviter . The song would later appear on the second disc of The Best of Bruce Dickinson compilation . The brothers were impressed with Dickinson 's vocal abilities and asked him to join their group . 
 Dickinson played pubs with Shots on a regular basis to small audiences . One particular night , Dickinson suddenly stopped in the middle of a song and started interviewing a man in the audience , heckling for not paying enough attention . He got such a good response he started doing it every night until it became a regular routine used to catch the audience 's attention . Dickinson states that this experience taught him how to be a frontman . 
 The next step in Dickinson 's career was taken in a pub called the Prince of Wales in Gravesend , Kent , where Shots were playing regularly , when Barry Graham ( " Thunderstick " ) and Paul Samson paid a visit . Impressed with his stage @-@ act , they talked with Dickinson afterwards and invited him to be their new singer . Dickinson agreed to join their band , Samson , but only once he 'd finished taking his History finals two weeks later . Until that point , he had been neglecting his University education . As a result , the University had tried to kick him out for failing his Second Year exams and not paying his accommodation fees , but was saved because of his role as Entertainments Officer . After writing 6 months worth of essays in the space of two weeks and some last minute cramming for his exams , Dickinson achieved a 2 : 2 . 
 On 19 July 2011 , Dickinson was presented with an honorary music doctorate from his alma mater , in honour of his contribution to the music industry . 
 = = Samson : 1979 – 1981 = = 
 After meeting Paul Samson and Barry Purkis at the Prince of Wales , and while still undertaking his final university exams , Dickinson joined Samson onstage at Bishop 's Stortford to perform one of their songs , " Rock Me Baby " , cementing his role as their new lead vocalist . 
 The band had already released their debut album , Survivors , in 1979 on an independent label , two months before Dickinson joined . Immediately following the completion of his University work , he met up with the band at Greenwich 's Wood Wharf studios to learn the Survivors album . Although the tracks did not suit his vocal style , the band soon wrote the majority of the following Head On album in their earliest rehearsal sessions , some of which were immediately incorporated into their live set . 
 It was during these early rehearsals that the nickname " Bruce Bruce " came about , derived from Monty Python 's " Bruces sketch " . The name became very tiresome as the band 's management continually wrote dud cheques , made payable to " Bruce Bruce " , as a joke . Dickinson later commented that he did not like it but considered it " a sort of stage name " and accepted it . 
 Dickinson was dismayed to learn that not all rock performers were " great artists " ; he felt that some , such as Samson , were only interested in women , drugs and alcohol , which he was unable to relate to . Although he had smoked joints before , Dickinson discovered that it was impossible to communicate with other band members if he was sober , deciding that it was " the price that had to be paid " . 
 While fronting the band , Dickinson also came across Iron Maiden for the first time , who were supporting Samson at the Music Machine in 1980 . As Dickinson recalls ; " I was watching them , and they were good , really fucking good , and at that moment , I remember thinking , ' I wanna fucking sing for that band . In fact , I 'm going to sing for that band ! I know I 'm going to sing for that band ! ' ... I just thought , ' This is really me . Not Samson . ' " 
 Dickinson remained in the band for another year , recording two studio albums with them — Head On and Shock Tactics . However , Samson soon ran into difficulties with their record label , Gem , who went out of business and failed to finance their European tour in support of Iron Maiden . The band were turned over to RCA , which began neglecting the group , and so they promptly fired their management team and the resulting injunction meant that their equipment was reclaimed and they could not be paid for their concert performances . The band 's last gig was at Reading Festival , after which Dickinson was approached by Iron Maiden 's manager , Rod Smallwood , who asked him to audition to be their new lead vocalist . 
 = = Iron Maiden = = 
 = = = Beginnings and success : 1981 – 1985 = = = 
 Dickinson went to audition for Iron Maiden at a rehearsal room in Hackney in September 1981 and immediately discovered that this was a much more professional operation than he was used to with Samson . In the practice rooms , the band played through " Prowler " , " Sanctuary " , " Running Free " and " Remember Tomorrow " , before asking Dickinson to sing the same songs again in a recording studio , and he was immediately inducted into the group . 
 Iron Maiden had a strict and organised routine that suited the band 's writing style , which Dickinson described as a " time table " . After a few gigs , they began writing new material for their third album , The Number of the Beast , released in 1982 . In the wake of Samson 's contractual problems , Dickinson could not legally be credited on any of the record 's songs , having to make , what he called , a " moral contribution " , later revealing that he had contributed limited creative input to " The Prisoner " , " Children of the Damned " and " Run to the Hills " . The album was a major success , topping the UK charts , and earning platinum status in the UK and the US . Following the release , the band embarked on a supporting tour around the globe . 
 On the following albums , 1983 's Piece of Mind and 1984 's Powerslave , Steve Harris 's song @-@ writing monopoly was pushed aside in favour of other members ' ideas , with Dickinson contributing to a number of tracks , including the singles " Flight of Icarus " and " 2 Minutes to Midnight " . Throughout the World Slavery Tour , as part of the new theatrical elements incorporated into the band 's stage @-@ show , Dickinson wore a feathered mask during " Powerslave " . This was the band 's longest tour to date , during which Dickinson considered going home mid @-@ tour , due to the high number of shows . Iron Maiden 's management were continually adding dates , until Dickinson demanded that they stop or he would leave the group . 
 = = = Growing tensions and departure : 1986 – 1993 = = = 
 After a six @-@ month break , which Dickinson mostly spent practising fencing , Iron Maiden began writing their next album , Somewhere in Time . Dickinson was disappointed with the effort as he felt that the band needed a more dramatic stylistic departure from past records to remain relevant , despite its introduction of synthesised bass and guitars . He has no writing credits on the release , as his material , based on his own suggestion that the album should be more acoustic @-@ focused , was rejected by the rest of the band . Steve Harris , on the other hand , stated that his material was rejected because it was not good enough , and that Dickinson " was probably more burnt out than anyone at the end of the last tour " . 
 After a subsequent tour , Iron Maiden started working on their next studio effort , Seventh Son of a Seventh Son , which featured more progressive rock elements than the band 's previous records . Although it became their second release to top the UK charts , it was also Dickinson 's first album with the band that did not achieve platinum status in the US . Unlike Somewhere in Time , Dickinson was much more enthusiastic about this album due to its concept and has several song @-@ writing credits . After the following tour in 1988 , the band decided to take a year off . 
 During the next album 's writing stage , Adrian Smith left Iron Maiden , and was replaced by Janick Gers . Iron Maiden 's eighth studio release , 1990 's No Prayer for the Dying , had a raw sound that , according to AllMusic , did not " hold up well " compared to past efforts , as it was recorded in a barn which Steve Harris owned , with a mobile studio owned by the Rolling Stones . The record featured Dickinson 's " Bring Your Daughter ... to the Slaughter " , originally composed for a film soundtrack , which despite receiving a Golden Raspberry Award for worst original song in 1989 , became the band 's first and only single to top the UK singles chart . By 1992 , Harris had converted his barn into a proper studio , and the new album , Fear of the Dark , was recorded there , resulting in a better overall sound than No Prayer for the Dying , although Dickinson still claims it had limitations due to its size . 
 After the Fear of the Dark Tour , Dickinson decided to leave Iron Maiden to concentrate on his solo career . At that point the band had already booked a following tour in 1993 , which Dickinson did not enjoy . Throughout the tour , Dickinson drew a lot of criticism from his band mates , with Steve Harris in particular saying , " I really wanted to kill him . " According to Harris , Dickinson would only perform when the press was there , whereas at other concerts he would only mumble his way through songs . Dickinson has since denied the accusations that he was deliberately under @-@ performing , arguing that it was impossible to give a decent performance some nights because of the atmosphere . His last performance with the band was filmed by the BBC at Pinewood Studios and released as a live video , entitled Raising Hell . 
 = = = Return : 1999 – present = = = 
 Along with Adrian Smith , Dickinson rejoined Iron Maiden in 1999 with Janick Gers remaining in the band , after he was approached by manager Rod Smallwood . Smallwood also spoke to Steve Harris about Dickinson 's return , who initially had reservations about the prospect , but soon came round to the idea , deliberating that they knew of his abilities and that it was a case of " better the devil you know " . Harris and Dickinson agreed to meet at Smallwood 's home in Brighton in January 1999 for the first conversation they would have with each other since 1993 . Although both men were nervous about the encounter , upon seeing each other the tension immediately dissipated and both agreed that Dickinson should return to the group . 
 After embarking on a small tour , the band set about recording Brave New World , their first studio album with Dickinson since 1992 . Dickinson insisted that they find a replacement for the now retired Martin Birch , the band 's regular producer , and record in a different studio than the one in which they made No Prayer for the Dying and Fear of the Dark , to which Harris agreed . The album was recorded at Guillaume Tell Studios , Paris with producer Kevin Shirley , after which Iron Maiden undertook a supporting tour culminating with a performance at the Rock in Rio festival before a crowd of 250 @,@ 000 . 
 In 2003 they recorded and released Dance of Death at London 's SARM Studios with Kevin Shirley , now the band 's new regular producer . After two further stints on the road ( Dance of Death World Tour and Eddie Rips Up the World Tour ) Iron Maiden returned to SARM in 2006 to record their next studio album , A Matter of Life and Death , and embarked on a supporting tour . In 2008 and 2009 , the band set out on the Somewhere Back in Time World Tour , which has since been described as " groundbreaking " for its use of Ed Force One , the band 's customised Boeing 757 , flown by Dickinson himself , and led to the documentary film Iron Maiden : Flight 666 , which had a limited cinema release in April 2009 . Iron Maiden held another world tour in 2010 and 2011 in support of The Final Frontier , their first album recorded at Compass Point Studios , Nassau , Bahamas since 1986 's Somewhere in Time , and which peaked at No. 1 in 28 countries . 
 In September 2014 , Iron Maiden began recording their sixteenth studio album , The Book of Souls , at Guillaume Tell Studios , Paris . The release features two songs written solely by Dickinson for the first time since Powerslave , " If Eternity Should Fail " and " Empire of the Clouds " , the former originally penned for a possible solo record . " Empire of the Clouds " is notable for being the band 's longest ever song , at over 18 minutes in length , and features Dickinson on piano for the first time , which is how the song was written . The band will tour the album in 2016 , during which Dickinson once again piloted the band 's private plane , Ed Force One ( now a Boeing 747 @-@ 400 jumbo jet ) . 
 = = = = Ozzfest incident = = = = 
 In 2005 , Iron Maiden co @-@ headlined the US festival tour , Ozzfest , with Black Sabbath . Lead singer Ozzy Osbourne 's wife , Sharon , encouraged family friends and members of other bands to sabotage Iron Maiden 's last performance at Hyundai Pavilion in San Bernardino , California on 20 August , in an attack which Rod Smallwood criticised as " vile , dangerous , criminal and cowardly " , as well as disrespectful to fans who had paid to see the band perform " a full unhindered performance " . Osbourne ordered interference with the band 's PA , delayed the entrance of Eddie , the band 's mascot , and encouraged members of the Osbourne camp to throw eggs , lighters and bottle tops from the front of the audience . According to Dickinson , the attack was in response to his " disparaging remarks about reality @-@ TV shows that she took personally " , although The Guardian reported that he slated the Osbournes ' reality series and accused Ozzy Osbourne of using a teleprompter . Dickinson has since denied making comments against Ozzy Osbourne and Black Sabbath , but admitted that he criticised Ozzfest throughout the tour , attacking their " corporate " seating layout and the fact that " Most of the bands are there because they paid to be there . " 
 Following the concert at San Bernardino , Osbourne released a further statement which accused Dickinson of making several anti @-@ American comments , of which Classic Rock claimed that " nobody can present any cast @-@ iron evidence . " In addition , Osbourne claimed that the flag @-@ waving during " The Trooper " was disrespectful to American troops , at the time fighting alongside the British in Iraq , even though Dickinson had always held a Union Flag during the song , being based on the Battle of Balaclava during the Crimean War . It was also reported that Steve Harris had spoken to Ozzy Osbourne in San Bernardino , apologising for Dickinson 's comments , which Harris denies , stating that his words had been " twisted " . 
 = = Solo career = = 
 In early 1989 , Zomba asked Dickinson to produce a track for the movie A Nightmare on Elm Street 5 : The Dream Child , providing a budget , a studio , and a producer , Chris Tsangarides . Dickinson took up the opportunity and called an old friend of his , former Gillan guitarist , Janick Gers , and , shortly after meeting up , they had " Bring Your Daughter to the Slaughter " ready for the studio , then recorded with the assistance of bassist Andy Carr , and drummer Fabio del Rio . " I wrote it in about three minutes " , states Dickinson , " I don 't know where the title ' Bring Your Daughter to the Slaughter ' came from , but it just popped into my head . I thought , ' Bloody hell , straight out of AC / DC ! ' And I thought , ' Nightmare on Elm Street . Yeah , that 'll do . ' Impressed with the results , Zomba asked Dickinson if he was willing to record a whole album as well . With the same line @-@ up and producer , Dickinson 's solo debut , Tattooed Millionaire , was written and recorded within two weeks , and released in May 1990 , followed by a supporting tour . 
 Later that year , Dickinson participated on a re @-@ recording of Deep Purple 's " Smoke on the Water " , as part of the humanitarian effort Rock Aid Armenia . Backed by the band Skin , he produced a cover version of Alice Cooper 's " Elected " , along with Rowan Atkinson ( in character as Mr. Bean ) , which was used in 1992 for Comic Relief , and five years later , on Bean Soundtrack . 
 For his second solo effort , Dickinson received the collaboration of American producer , Keith Olsen , and , while working on the record in LA , decided to leave Iron Maiden . Unhappy with the direction he was taking with Olsen , Dickinson began working with Tribe of Gypsies guitarist Roy Z and started the album again from scratch . Balls to Picasso was recorded with Tribe of Gypsies as the backing band , and was released in 1994 . That same year , Dickinson recorded a cover version of " Sabbath Bloody Sabbath " with the band Godspeed for Black Sabbath 's tribute album Nativity in Black . Tribe of Gypsies departed to work on their own material and Dickinson tracked down another band , including his new writing partner and guitarist , Alex Dickson . While touring with this new outfit in 1994 , Dickinson performed in Sarajevo , then under siege during the Bosnian War ; a documentary film based on the concert , entitled Scream For Me Sarajevo , completed filming in December 2015 . 
 After the Balls to Picasso supporting tour finished , he started working on a new studio record , Skunkworks . Dickinson decided that Skunkworks would be the title of the band as well , but the record company refused to release the album without his name on the cover . Dickinson hired producer Jack Endino , most noted for producing the first Nirvana album . The " Skunkworks " entity ceased to be when the tour ended . " I was devastated by the Skunkworks thing " , stated Dickinson , " Skunkworks was a record which I tore myself apart to make and nobody seemed to give a shit . " 
 After a short period of inactivity , Dickinson once again teamed up with Roy Z and Tribe of Gypsies to record his next album , Accident of Birth ; " It was actually Roy that dragged me back into some <unk> , because he called up and he said , ' Listen , I 've got some stuff and it 's like a metal record . ' And I wasn 't thrilled , I wasn 't really sure that I had anything to offer ... Then he played me some backing @-@ tracks he 'd done for what was to become Accident of Birth down the phone and I thought ' There is something there . ' " Former Iron Maiden guitarist , Adrian Smith , was asked to guest on the record , but remained as a full @-@ time member of Dickinson 's solo outfit . The album marked a return to heavy metal for Dickinson , with Sputnikmusic remarking , " The album 's heavy feel is very satisfying , and definitely fills that void left by Maiden during the 90 's . " The follow @-@ up , The Chemical Wedding , was a semi @-@ concept album on alchemy , which drew inspiration from William Blake 's writings ; with some songs , such as " Book of Thel " , having the same title as some of his poems , and the cover artwork featuring one of his paintings . The record was even more successful than its predecessor , with Sputnikmusic commenting , " Bruce had shattered all expectations to create an album that might even be better than the previous one . " During The Chemical Wedding 's supporting tour , the live album , Scream for Me Brazil was recorded in São Paulo , after which Dickinson and Smith returned to Iron Maiden in February 1999 . 
 In 2000 , Dickinson performed vocals on the song , " Into the Black Hole " , for Ayreon 's Universal <unk> Part 2 : Flight of the <unk> . Later that year , he collaborated with Judas Priest 's front @-@ man , Rob Halford , recording , " The One You Love to Hate " , for Halford 's debut , Resurrection . A compilation , entitled The Best of Bruce Dickinson , was released in late 2001 , including two new songs and a bonus disc of rarities . His latest solo album , Tyranny of Souls was released in May 2005 . This time the song @-@ writing was all split between Roy Z and Dickinson and many songs were composed by Z sending recordings of riffs to Dickinson while he was on tour with Iron Maiden . On 21 June 2005 , Dickinson 's complete solo discography was re @-@ released , featuring bonus discs with rare and remastered tracks . That same year , Dickinson contributed to the song , " Beast in the Light " , from <unk> 's album , Execution , and their subsequent live album . A three @-@ DVD box set , entitled Anthology , was released on 19 June 2006 , containing concerts and promo videos from throughout his solo career , as well as an old Samson video , entitled " <unk> of Steel " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Dickinson was first married to Jane in 1983 , from whom he was divorced in 1987 . He has three children with his second wife , Paddy Bowden : Austin ( born 1990 ) , Griffin ( born 1992 ) , and Kia ( born 1994 ) . All three were born in Chiswick , London , where Dickinson has lived since 1981 . Austin Dickinson was the lead singer in metalcore band Rise to Remain until their breakup in 2015 , at which point he formed a new group , As Lions . Griffin Dickinson , who previously worked as a stage carpenter for Iron Maiden during their tours , is the vocalist in melodic hardcore band <unk> ( formerly known as <unk> ) . 
 Dickinson 's cousin , Rob Dickinson , was the lead singer of British alternative rock band Catherine Wheel and founded Singer Vehicle Design who specialise in upgrading classic Porsche <unk> . In an interview with Sarah Montague for BBC 's HARDtalk , Dickinson agreed with Montague 's description of himself as a conservative and a eurosceptic . 
 In 2015 , Dickinson underwent seven weeks of chemotherapy and radiation therapy for a cancerous tumour found at the back of his tongue . Dickinson 's medical team expected him to make a full recovery as the tumour was discovered in the early stages . On 15 May , Dickinson was given the all @-@ clear by his specialists . 
 = = Other work = = 
 Dickinson 's interests and non @-@ musical activities include writing , broadcasting , fencing ( at which he has competed internationally , placing 7th in Great Britain , and has founded a fencing equipment company under the brand name " <unk> " ) , beer brewing and aviation . Due to the wide variety of Dickinson 's pursuits , Intelligent Life named him as a living example of a polymath in 2009 . 
 = = = Aviation = = = 
 Dickinson learned to fly recreationally in Florida in the 1990s and now holds an airline transport pilot 's licence . He regularly flew Boeing 757s in his role as captain for the now @-@ defunct UK charter airline Astraeus , which , from 16 September 2010 , employed him as Marketing Director . One of his key roles in that position was to promote Astraeus ' services by increasing their number of videos , leading to the UK Civil Aviation Authority releasing a video featuring Dickinson on aircraft loading safety in June 2011 . 
 Following Astraeus ' closure on 21 November 2011 , Dickinson branched into entrepreneurship when he launched Cardiff Aviation Ltd on 1 May 2012 , an aircraft maintenance business based at the Twin Peaks Hangar in St Athan , Vale of Glamorgan , Wales . According to The Wall Street Journal , in January 2013 Cardiff Aviation had created 40 jobs and hoped to have over a hundred personnel by the summer of 2013 . In June 2013 , The Daily Telegraph reported that the business had expanded to between 60 and 70 employees and are in discussions to set up their own airline . In August 2015 , Cardiff Aviation signed a deal to provide airline support to Air Djibouti . 
 His role as a pilot has led to some high @-@ profile flights , which include returning a group of British RAF pilots from Afghanistan in 2008 , 200 UK citizens from Lebanon during the Israel / Hezbollah conflict in 2006 , and 180 stranded holiday makers from Egypt following the collapse of XL Airways UK in September 2008 . In addition , he flew Rangers F.C. and Liverpool F.C. to away matches in Israel and Italy in 2007 and 2010 respectively . 
 For the 2008 – 09 " Somewhere Back in Time World Tour " , he piloted Iron Maiden 's chartered Boeing 757 , dubbed " Ed Force One " , specially converted to carry the band 's equipment between continents , which subsequently led to a documentary film , Iron Maiden : Flight 666 . Dickinson flew " Ed Force One " again for " The Final Frontier World Tour " in 2011 . For the 2016 The Book of Souls World Tour , the band upgraded to a Boeing 747 @-@ 400 jumbo jet , which meant that Dickinson had to undertake type conversion in order to fly the aircraft . In 2014 , Dickinson purchased a Fokker Dr.I triplane replica G @-@ <unk> and joined the Great War Display Team , which re @-@ enacts First World War air battles at airshows across the UK . 
 = = = Radio and TV = = = 
 Dickinson presented Bruce Dickinson 's Friday Rock Show on BBC radio station 6 Music from 2002 – 2010 . In March 2010 , the BBC announced that , after over eight years , Dickinson 's show was to be axed . His final broadcast was on 28 May 2010 , with the regular format abandoned in favour of a personal and musical tribute to the recently deceased Ronnie James Dio . Dickinson scorned the BBC executives for the cancellation , playing the Johnny Paycheck version of " Take This Job and Shove It " . In addition to his show on 6 Music , Dickinson also hosted a series entitled Masters of Rock on BBC Radio 2 from 2003 to 2007 . Dickinson 's catalogue of 6 Music programmes were acquired in 2014 by <unk> radio , who began re @-@ broadcasting episodes in December . 
 In 2005 , Dickinson hosted a 5 @-@ part historical TV series about aviation , Flying Heavy Metal , which was shown on the Discovery Channel , and later on Discovery Turbo in the UK . He was a guest on an episode of the Military Channel 's The Greatest Ever , where he drove a Russian T @-@ 34 tank . In 2006 , Dickinson presented a documentary for Sky One entitled Inside Spontaneous Human Combustion with Bruce Dickinson , in which he investigated the phenomenon by enlisting the help of several experts and performing various experiments to determine its possible cause . Other television appearances include guesting on quiz shows such as Never Mind the Buzzcocks and the short @-@ lived Space Cadets , as well as the chat show Clarkson , hosted by Jeremy Clarkson . Dickinson has also appeared in a BBC series called The Paradise Club , undertaking the role of a musician named Jake Skinner . On 27 July 2012 , Dickinson spent a day being filmed as a guest star for a season four episode of Ice Pilots NWT , in which he flew a Douglas DC @-@ 3 and took part in " touch @-@ and @-@ go drills " in a Douglas DC @-@ 4 with Buffalo Airways . , he also appeared in a season five episode when two Buffalo Airways planes were brought to his Cardiff Aviation base in Wales . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 During a 1986 – 1987 Iron Maiden tour , and in the wake of a divorce , Dickinson started writing his first book . Inspired by the novels of Tom Sharpe , in addition to Biggles and Penthouse , he created The Adventures of Lord Iffy <unk> , which Kerrang ! describes as " a satirical swipe at fetishism among the upper classes " , and whose title character is a " semi @-@ transvestite " British land owner . 
 Following its completion , Dickinson approached Sidgwick & Jackson , who , according to Dickinson , agreed to publish the book before reading it based on Iron Maiden 's album sales alone . Released in 1990 ( ISBN 0 @-@ 283 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 ) , the novel sold more than 40 @,@ 000 copies almost immediately . Due to the high demand , Sidgwick & Jackson asked Dickinson to produce a sequel , which became 1992 's The Missionary Position ( ISBN 0 @-@ 283 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 ) , a satire of televangelism . No further additions to the series have been published , although Dickinson did write the first 60 pages to a prequel , set during " Lord Iffy 's schooldays " , which he " just thought was rubbish and ripped it all up . I didn 't think it was funny . " 
 Dickinson has turned his hand to scriptwriting , co @-@ authoring Chemical Wedding with director Julian Doyle . The film , in which Dickinson played a few small cameo roles and composed the soundtrack , was released in 2008 and starred Simon Callow . On 15 October 2015 , HarperCollins and Dey Street announced that they would publish Dickinson 's memoirs , expected in 2017 . 
 = = = Beer = = = 
 In 2013 , Iron Maiden collaborated with Robinsons Brewery in Stockport , England to create Trooper , a 4 @.@ 8 % cask / 4 @.@ 7 % bottled ale whose recipe Dickinson formulated with head brewer Martyn Weeks . As of May 2014 , the beer has sold 2 @.@ 5 million pints in 40 countries , making it Robinsons ' most successful export . Following Trooper 's success , Dickinson , a fan of traditional English cask beer , stated that he intends to develop more beers in the future , although new products will be " under the umbrella of Trooper and not Iron Maiden [ as ] Trooper has taken on a life of its own . People drink it because they like the beer , not because they are Maiden fans " . 
 = = Singing style and stage performance = = 
 Although Dickinson never received formal training , he still possessed a wide vocal range which was trademarked by his quasi @-@ operatic tenor . Along with Ronnie James Dio and Rob Halford , Dickinson is one of the pioneers of the operatic vocal style later to be adopted by power metal vocalists and regularly appears near the top in lists of the greatest rock vocalists / front @-@ men of all time . Dickinson says that his style was influenced primarily by Arthur Brown , Peter Hammill ( Van der Graaf Generator ) , Ian Anderson ( Jethro Tull ) and Ian Gillan ( Deep Purple ) . 
 Dickinson 's singing varied notably in the 1990s in the recording of albums such as No Prayer for the Dying , Fear of the Dark and his first solo work Tattooed Millionaire , making use of a much more raspy and unpolished sound , befitting their stripped down style . Since returning to Iron Maiden in 1999 , his singing style has returned to much like it was in the 1980s , though his voice has lowered with age . According to a report published in the Daily Mirror , Dickinson has an estimated vocal range of 4 @.@ 25 octaves . His voice led to the nickname " The Air Raid Siren " , which Billboard states is " due to the ferocious power of his singing " , although Dickinson claims it actually originated from a fan complaint . 
 In addition to his vocal ability , Dickinson is known for his energetic stage performances , which he delivers consistently despite his age . He considers including the audience " the essence of the Maiden experience " and that his role is to " shrink the venue ... to turn that football stadium into the world 's smallest club . " To achieve this , Dickinson insists on gaining eye contact with audience members and urges them to join in with the phrase " scream for me " ( followed by the concert 's location ) . He is critical of performers who do not connect with their fans , particularly those who " [ hide ] behind the amps " and use an <unk> , remarking that " people pay good money and [ they ] can 't even remember the sodding words . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 ^ * Dickinson appeared on the album 's re @-@ issue only , as the original version was completed before he joined the band . 
 = Thomas Holley Chivers = 
 Thomas Holley Chivers ( October 18 , 1809 – December 18 , 1858 ) was an American doctor @-@ turned @-@ poet from the state of Georgia . He is best known for his friendship with Edgar Allan Poe and his controversial defense of the poet after his death . 
 Born into a wealthy Georgia family , Chivers became interested in poetry at a young age . After he and his first wife separated , he received a medical degree from Transylvania University but focused his energy on publishing rather than medicine . In addition to submitting poems to various magazines and journals , Chivers published several volumes of poetry , including The Lost Pleiad in 1845 , as well as plays . Edgar Allan Poe showed an interest in the young poet and encouraged his work . Chivers spent the last few years of his life defending the reputation of Poe , who had died in 1849 , though he also thought Poe had been heavily influenced by his own poetry . Chivers died in Georgia in 1858 . 
 As a literary theorist , Chivers believed in divine inspiration . He encouraged the development of a distinctive American style of literature and especially promoted young writers . His poems were known for religious overtones with an emphasis on death and reunions with lost loved ones in the afterlife . Though he built up a mild reputation in his day , he was soon forgotten after his death . 
 = = Life and work = = 
 Chivers was born on October 18 , 1809 , at Digby Manor , his father 's plantation near Washington , Georgia . At age seven , he was introduced to poetry when he read William Cowper 's " The Rose " . In 1827 , Chivers married his 16 @-@ year @-@ old cousin Frances Elizabeth Chivers . The two soon separated due to alleged meddling by Frances Chivers Albert , the wife of the poet 's uncle , prior to the birth of their daughter in 1828 . It has also been suggested their separation was due to abuse , though these rumors originated from the same uncle . After this incident , Chivers compared himself to Lord Byron , whose wife had also left him . Chivers went on to receive a degree in medicine in 1830 from Transylvania University in Kentucky . His thesis was titled " Intermittent and <unk> <unk> " . 
 Chivers wandered throughout the West and North of the United States , publishing poetry in various places before returning to Georgia . In 1832 , Chivers published The Path of Sorrow , a collection of poetry based on the events of his troubled first marriage . Two years later , he published Conrad and Eudora ; or , The Death of Alonzo , the first fictionalized account of the actual 1825 murder case nicknamed the " Kentucky Tragedy " . The work was later renamed Leoni , The Orphan of Venice . On November 21 , 1834 , Chivers married Harriet Hunt of Springfield , Massachusetts and the couple had four children , though all died young . Chivers and his first wife never legally divorced — one such suit was dismissed in court in 1835 — but Georgia law invalidated marriage after a spouse 's absence of five years or more . Though Chivers contributed to various newspapers and magazines , his poetry was turned down for publication by the Southern Literary Messenger in March 1835 , which suggested he return to medicine and the " lancet and pill @-@ box " . Though the poems were not printed , unsigned commentary on them was presented in an editorial , referring to verses submitted by " T. H. C. , M. D. " The Lost Pleiad was self @-@ published in New York in 1845 to initial success , though sales rapidly declined . In 1837 , Chivers self @-@ published Nacoochee ; or , the Beautiful Star , With Other Poems . The volume was dedicated to his mother , who died a year later . 
 = = = Relationship with Edgar Allan Poe = = = 
 Chivers is best known for his association with Edgar Allan Poe and , in fact , it is through this relationship that Chivers and his work was rediscovered in the 20th century . The first interaction between the two was in 1840 though they did not meet until 1845 in New York . The two became friends and Chivers was willing to give Poe lifetime financial support if he moved to the South . Chivers appreciated Poe 's ability and wrote that George Rex Graham was seriously underpaying Poe for his work on Graham 's Magazine . " He ought to give you ten thousand dollars a year ... It is richly worth it ... [ Graham ] is greatly indebted to you . It is not my opinion that you have ever been , or ever will be , paid for your intellectual labours . You need never expect it , until you establish a Magazine of your own " , he wrote , referring to Poe 's plans to begin The Stylus . Even so , Chivers was concerned about Poe 's reputation as a severe literary critic , cautioning him about " when you tomahawk people " . Poe , in fact , had been hoping Chivers would lend his wealth as a financial backer for The Stylus and possibly even serve as a co @-@ editor in its early planning stages . Chivers considered Poe 's proposal but was not able to accept because of the death of his three @-@ year @-@ old daughter just over a week later . 
 Poe had written about Chivers in the second part of his " <unk> " series , published in Graham 's Magazine in December 1841 . Poe said : 
 His productions affect one as a wild dream — strange , incongruous , full of images of more than arabesque monstrosity , and snatches of sweet unsustained song . Even his worst nonsense ( and some of it is horrible ) has an indefinite charm of sentiment and melody . We can never be sure that there is any meaning in his words — neither is there any meaning in many of our finest musical airs — but the effect is very similar in both . His figures of speech are metaphor run mad , and his grammar is often none at all . Yet there are as fine individual passages to be found in the poems of Dr. Chivers , as in those of any poet whatsoever . 
 The two had corresponded through letters but finally met in June or July 1845 . Chivers visited Poe when Poe was sick and bedridden and when Poe 's wife Virginia was in an especially difficult period of her struggle with tuberculosis . Chivers later recalled that Poe 's voice was " like the soft tones of an Aeolian Harp when the music that has been sleeping in the strings is awakened by the Breezes of Eden laden with sweet Spices from the mountains of the Lord " . 
 By September 1845 , however , Chivers was lecturing Poe on the dangers of alcohol . A Prohibitionist , he said Poe was wasting his God @-@ given talents by indulging in drink . " Why should a Man whom God , by nature , has endowed with such transcendent abilities , so degrade himself into the <unk> automaton as to be moved only by the poisonous steam of Hell @-@ fire ? " he said . While Poe 's wife Virginia was sick , Chivers had to carry Poe home after a night of excess . 
 Moreover , as attested to in an 1848 pamphlet titled Search After Truth , Chivers disagreed with Poe regarding aesthetics . This small booklet presents a series of dialogues between the Seer [ Chivers ] and Politian [ Poe ] . For Chivers , a poet should be a Shelleyan or Swedenborgian visionary intent on capturing mystic realms of experience in language . For Poe , the poet is merely a superior wordsmith . The wise Seer ultimately leads <unk> to the truth . 
 = = = After Poe 's death = = = 
 After Poe 's death , Chivers accused Poe of plagiarizing both " The Raven " and " Ulalume " from his own work though other critics suggested Chivers 's Eonchs of Ruby were a " mediocre restatement " of Poe 's poems . The first poem of the collection , " The Vigil of Aiden " , was an homage to Poe , using names like " Lenore " and the refrain " forever more ! " On July 30 , 1854 , Chivers published an essay called " Origin of Poe 's Raven " under the pseudonym Fiat <unk> , claiming that he inspired Poe to use trochaic octameter and the word " nevermore " in " The Raven " . Chivers also suggested in the Georgia Citizen that Poe learned to write poetry from him . As literary scholar Randy Nelson wrote : " anybody who 's read both Poe and Thomas Holley Chivers can see that one of them ' influenced ' the other , but just who took what from whom isn 't clear . " 
 Even so , Chivers continued to praise and admire Poe ( albeit careful to point out Poe 's literary debt to him ) and was one of the first to present a picture of the " real Poe " in the face of the sustained attacks on Poe 's reputation by the Reverend Rufus Wilmot Griswold , the poet 's literary executor . This correction took the form of a memoir now titled Chivers ' Life of Poe , not published until 1952 . Chivers said of Griswold that he " is not only incompetent to Edit any of [ Poe 's ] works , but totally unconscious of the duties which he and every man who sets himself up as a Literary Executor , owe the dead . " Chivers continued to defend Poe 's reputation until the end of his life . 
 = = = Final years and death = = = 
 From 1845 to 1850 , Chivers had been living with his wife in Georgia , then spent the next five years in the North . His poetry collection Eonchs of Ruby , A Gift of Love was published in 1851 with a subtitle meant to capitalize on the gift book trend . Chivers explained the title : " The Word <unk> is the same as Concha Marina — Shell of the Sea . <unk> is used ... merely for its euphony . " Throughout the collection , Chivers experiments with the sonic effects of words rather than their literal meaning . Atlanta : or the True Blessed Island of Poesy : A Paul Epic in Three <unk> was first published in three installments in the Georgia Citizen beginning in January 1853 . Later that year , <unk> ; or , <unk> of Amber Full of the Tears of Love was printed in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania and generally received unfavorably . Very shortly after , the same publisher brought out Virginalia ; or , Songs of My Summer Nights , a collection made up of poems that were generally under 200 lines each , about half of which had previously been published in magazines . 
 By 1855 , Chivers and his wife had moved back to Georgia and he predicted that the slavery issue would soon force his home state to break from the United States . A slaveholder himself , Chivers did not believe that slaves should be abused , though he still defended the institution against abolitionists . Struck with sudden illness , Chivers wrote his will before dying on December 18 , 1858 , in Decatur , Georgia . His last words were , " All is perfect peace with me . " His last published work , a drama titled The Sons of <unk> , had been published earlier that year . At the time of his death , Chivers had prepared several manuscripts of his literary theory with the intention of publishing them in several volumes of books and as part of a lecture series . In his will , he left one dollar for his first wife and their daughter . 
 = = Poetic theory and literary reputation = = 
 In his poetry , Chivers made use of legends and themes from Native American culture , particularly the Cherokee , though often with Christian overtones . He was also heavily influenced by the work of François @-@ René de Chateaubriand and Emanuel Swedenborg . Many of Chivers 's poems included themes of death and sorrow , often using images of shrouds , coffins , angels , and reunions with lost loves in the afterlife . Religious conventions at the time made discussion of death popular , as was reflected in poetry . Because of his background as a doctor , Chivers was able to graphically depict the last moments before someone 's death . 
 Chivers believed in a close connection between poetry and God and that true poetry could only be written through divine inspiration . He once wrote : " Poets are the apostles of divine thought , who are clothed with an authority from the Most High , to work miracles in the minds of men " . He also wrote : " Poetry is the power given by God to man of manifesting ... the wise relations that subsist between him and God " , and it " is that crystal river of the soul which runs through all the avenues of life , and after purifying the affections of the heart , empties itself into the Sea of God " . In Nacoochee , the preface states : " Poetry is that crystal river of the soul which runs through all the avenues of life , and after purifying the affections of the heart , empties itself into the Sea of God . " In his introduction to Atlanta , written in 1842 but not published until 1853 , Chivers gives a lengthy discussion of his poetic theory , pre @-@ dating many ideas Poe would suggest in " The Poetic Principle " ( 1850 ) . Chivers , for example , suggests that poems should be short to be successful : " No poem of any considerable length ... can be pleasing to any well @-@ educated person for any length of time " . He also experimented with blank verse as early as 1832 and his 1853 collection , Virginalia , included mostly poems using blank verse . 
 At least for a time , he considered Elizabeth Barrett Browning the best contemporary English poet . Like many from his time , Chivers called for the development of a distinctive American literature and he especially encouraged young writers . Poe called the 1845 poetry collection The Lost Pleiad " the honest and fervent utterance of an exquisitely sensitive heart . " Overall , he called Chivers " one of the best and one of the worst poets in America " . William Gilmore Simms offered conditional praise of Chivers 's poetry as well : " He possesses a poetic ardor sufficiently fervid , and a singularly marked command of language . But he should have been caught young , and well @-@ <unk> , and subjected to the severest training ... As an artist , Dr. Chivers is yet in his <unk> . " Simms also commented that his works were too gloomy and melancholy . Chivers was one of a group of poets criticized for " intensity of epithet " in Bayard Taylor 's verse parody The Echo Club and Other Literary Diversions ( 1876 ) . 
 Though Chivers built up a mild reputation during his lifetime , counting Algernon Charles Swinburne among his admirers , his fame faded away quickly after his death . Other writers that acknowledged his influence included Dante Gabriel Rossetti and William Michael Rossetti . Others , however , were more critical . One anonymous reviewer , possibly Evert Augustus Duyckinck , joked that Chivers was formulaic and suggested the formula included 30 % Percy Bysshe Shelley , 20 % Poe , 20 % " mild idiocy " , 10 % " gibbering idiocy " , 10 % " raving mania " and 10 % " sweetness and originality " . Literary scholar S. Foster Damon wrote that Chivers would have had a stronger reputation if he were born in the North and " the literary coteries there would surely have pruned and preserved him ... But the time and space were against him . " 
 = = List of works = = 
 The Path of Sorrow ; or , the Lament of Youth ( 1832 ) 
 Conrad and Eudora ; or , the Death of Alonzo ( 1834 ) 
 Nacoochee ; or , the Beautiful Star With Other Poems ( 1837 ) 
 The Lost Pleiad , and Other Poems ( 1845 ) 
 Search After Truth ; or , A New Revelation of the Psycho @-@ Physiological Nature of Man . ( 1848 ) 
 Eonchs of Ruby : a Gift of Love ( 1851 ) 
 The Death of the Devil , A Serio @-@ <unk> , <unk> @-@ Comico , <unk> @-@ Whiteman Extravaganza ( 1852 ) 
 Atlanta ; or , the True Blessed Island of Poesy , a Paul Epic ( 1853 ) [ 1 ] 
 <unk> ; or , <unk> of Amber Full of the Tears of Love ( 1853 ) 
 Virginalia ; or , Songs of My Summer Nights ( 1853 ) 
 The Sons of <unk> : a Tragic Apotheosis in Five Acts ( 1858 ) 
 = The Seinfeld Chronicles = 
 " The Seinfeld Chronicles " ( also known as " Good News , Bad News " or " Pilot " ) is the pilot episode of the American sitcom Seinfeld , which first aired on NBC on July 5 , 1989 . 
 The first of the 180 Seinfeld episodes , the pilot was written by show creators Larry David and Jerry Seinfeld , and directed by Art Wolff . The episode revolves around a fictionalized version of Seinfeld , who is unsure about the romantic intentions of a woman he met , and frets about the meaning of her signals with his friend George ( Jason Alexander ) and neighbor Kessler ( Michael Richards ) . 
 Though they had been asked to put together a 90 @-@ minute TV special , Seinfeld and David wrote a TV pilot as they felt their " show about nothing " concept would fit better in a shorter format . The storyline , and the main characters , were inspired by real @-@ life events and people . Though the NBC executives were unsure about the show , they , as Warren Littlefield would later state , " all said , ah what the hell , let 's try a pilot on this thing and see what happens " . The test audiences , however , reacted extremely negatively . Although NBC would still broadcast the episode to see how audiences and TV critics would react , the network had already decided not to pick up the show , as a result of the test @-@ results . 
 When The Seinfeld Chronicles aired , it was watched by nearly 11 % of American households , and received generally favorable reviews from critics , who reacted with disappointment that NBC did not order a first season . Convinced that the show had potential , and supported by the positive reviews , NBC executive Rick Ludwin managed to convince his superiors to order a four @-@ episode first season ( the smallest order in TV history ) , by offering a part of his personal budget in return . The show , renamed Seinfeld , would go on to become one of the most successful sitcoms in television history . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The series opens with Jerry Seinfeld ( Jerry Seinfeld ) and George Costanza ( Jason Alexander ) seated at Pete 's Luncheonette , debating the placement of one of George 's shirt buttons . Jerry tells George about a woman he met in Lansing , Michigan , Laura ( Pamela <unk> ) , who is coming to New York , and the two discuss whether or not she has romantic intentions . The next evening , Jerry tells his neighbor Kessler ( Michael Richards ) that he thinks he misunderstood the situation with Laura . However , he then receives a telephone call from Laura , who asks if she can stay overnight at his apartment . Though Jerry agrees , he is still unsure whether or not her visit is intended to be romantic . George and Jerry continue to debate the issue , with Jerry determined to find the true nature of her visit . 
 While waiting at the airport for Laura to arrive , Jerry and George try to identify the possible signals Laura might give upon her arrival , with George explaining the meaning of various greetings . However , when Laura arrives , her greeting is ambiguous . Upon arriving at Jerry 's apartment Laura removes her shoes and some excess clothing to get comfortable , asks for wine , and turns down the light and asks if she can stay over a second night . As Jerry removes his own shoes and begins to grow confident , the phone rings for Laura . When Laura gets off the phone she tells Jerry : " Never get engaged . " Jerry then realizes that he has no chance with Laura , but has already committed himself – and his one @-@ bedroom apartment – to an entire weekend with her , including a five @-@ hour sightseeing boat ride around Manhattan . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 The Seinfeld Chronicles was written as the pilot for the show that would eventually be called Seinfeld , though earlier versions of the script would refer to the program as Stand Up and The Jerry Seinfeld Show . The idea for the show started on November 2 , 1988 , after NBC executives had approached comedian Jerry Seinfeld to do a project with the network , upon a suggestion by George Shapiro , Seinfeld 's manager at the time . Seinfeld enlisted fellow comedian Larry David to help him develop it , and they wrote a concept for a special about where comedians get their material . However , upon further discussion , Seinfeld felt that the concept could not be sustained for 90 minutes , upon which the two decided that the project was to become a pilot for a TV @-@ series , rather than a special . Developed by NBC executive Rick Ludwin , and produced by Castle Rock Entertainment , it was a mix of Seinfeld 's stand @-@ up comedy routines and idiosyncratic , conversational scenes focusing on mundane aspects of everyday life . 
 Conceived as a " show about nothing , " in which the main characters would " just make fun of stuff " , Seinfeld said that the idea of the pilot episode was to explore the " gaps in society where there are no rules . " The storyline , as well as most of the main characters , were inspired by the personal lives of its creators . Jerry was a fictionalized version of Seinfeld , George a fictionalized version of Larry David and Kessler was based on David 's neighbor Kenny Kramer . Though Seinfeld was initially concerned the " wacky neighbor " would be too much of a cliché , David convinced him to put the character in the script . However , anticipating that the actual Kramer would exploit the benefits of having a TV character based on him , David hesitated to call the character Kramer . Thus , in the pilot , the character 's name was " Kessler " . However , intrigued by the name , Seinfeld was convinced that the character 's name should be Kramer , prompting Kenny Kramer to call NBC 's legal department with various financial and legal demands , most of which he received . The name inconsistency would eventually be corrected in the season 9 episode " The Betrayal " in which Kramer explains that Kessler is the name on his apartment buzzer . 
 David and Seinfeld re @-@ wrote the script several times before submitting it to the network , dropping and adding various elements . Originally George , who was called Bennett in early drafts , was a comedian as well , and the first scene of the episode focussed on Jerry and George discussing their stand @-@ up material . The character of Kramer , was not included in the first draft of the script , and in another draft he was called " Hoffman " . Another element that was added was Kessler 's dog , since it was originally planned that Jerry 's stand @-@ up routines would match the events of each episode . Though the stand @-@ up routine about dogs was eventually dropped , the scene in which Kessler enters with his dog remained in the episode . When David and Seinfeld eventually submitted the script , the network executives were unsure whether or not to produce the pilot , but as NBC executive Warren Littlefield would later state " we all said , ah what the hell , let 's try a pilot on this thing and see what happens " . 
 Directed by Art Wolff , the pilot was filmed in front of a live studio audience on April 27 , 1989 , at Stage 9 of Ren @-@ Mar Studios , the same studio where The Dick Van Dyke Show was filmed , which was seen by the crew as a good omen . The exterior of Pete 's Luncheonette , the restaurant in which the episode opens , was a leftover set piece from The Muppets Take Manhattan ( 1984 ) . Seinfeld 's stand @-@ up routine was recorded at Ren @-@ Mar Studios in Hollywood , in front of an audience of paid extras , though not all of the recorded material was included in the broadcast version . Additionally , a scene was recorded featuring Jerry and George driving to the airport talking about changing lanes on the road and giving " Thank you waves " , but was cut before broadcasting . The music used in the episode was composed by <unk> Epstein ; however , when the show was picked up , Epstein 's tune was replaced by the trademark slap bass music by Jonathan Wolff . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The Seinfeld Chronicles featured four characters that were intended to be series regulars if the show was to be picked @-@ up for a first season : Jerry , George , Kramer and Claire the waitress . Though it was already settled that Seinfeld would play a fictionalized version of himself , auditions were held for the other three characters . Though George was based on Larry David , David was keen on writing , and did not have the desire to portray the character himself . Prior to the casting progress , Seinfeld pleaded with his friend Jake Johannsen to play the part , but he rejected it . When the casting process started , as casting director Marc Hirschfeld stated , the casting crew " saw every actor [ they ] could possibly see in Los Angeles " . Among these actors were Larry Miller , Brad Hall , David Alan Grier , and Nathan Lane yet none of them seemed fit for the part . Jason Alexander auditioned for the part via a video tape , though he had very little hope for being cast , as he felt he was doing a Woody Allen impression . However , upon watching the tape , David and Seinfeld were immediately convinced Alexander would be the right actor to cast . However , traditionally casting sessions work with rounds , so Alexander and a few other actors considered for the role were flown to Los Angeles for a second audition . One of the other actors who made it to this round was Larry Miller . As Alexander knew Miller was a close friend of Seinfeld , he was convinced he would not get the part , but eventually did . 
 Kenny Kramer initially demanded that he would play the part of Kessler , as he served as the inspiration for the character . However , David did not want this and it was decided upon that casting sessions would be held . Among those who auditioned for the part of Kramer were Steve <unk> , Tony Shalhoub and Larry Hankin . Although he was not cast for the part Hankin would later portray an in @-@ show fictional version of Kramer in the season four episode " The Pilot " . Seinfeld and David were both familiar with Michael Richards , and David had worked with him on Fridays . Richards did his final audition at the Century Plaza Hotel on April 18 , 1989 , reputedly finishing with a handstand . David was not sure about casting Richards , as he was trying to cast an actor that resembled the original Kramer . However , impressed by Richards ' audition , Seinfeld convinced David that Richards would be the right actor for the part . 
 Lee Garlington was cast as Claire the Waitress , who in an earlier draft of the episode was called " Meg " . Though initially cast as a series regular , the character was replaced with Elaine Benes when the series was picked up for a first season . Accounts differ on the reason why the character was replaced . Warren Littlefield has said that it was because the character 's occupation : " I thought that as a waitress she 'd never be one of the gang . She 'd be relegated to pouring coffee , catching up . So I insisted they create a female character they wanted to spend time with " . Dennis Bjorklund of Seinfeld Reference has suggested that the character was dropped in favor of a female character with more sex appeal . However , Alexander said that Garlington was written out of the series because she had re @-@ written her scene and given it to David , who was not happy with this . Seinfeld has , however , stated that this was not the reason the character was removed from the show , but rather that the producers were looking for " someone who was more involved " . Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus , who would go on to replace Garlington , has stated that she was not aware of the pilot before becoming a regular on the show , and she will never watch it out of superstition . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The pilot was first screened by a group of two dozen NBC executives in Burbank , California in early 1989 . Although the pilot did not yield the explosion of laughter garnered by the pilots for the decade 's previous NBC successes like The Cosby Show and The Golden Girls , it drew mostly positive responses from the assembled executives . One exception was Brandon Tartikoff , who was concerned that the show was " Too New York , too Jewish " . Before the episode 's TV premiere it was shown to a test audience of 400 households , and met with extremely negative responses . Littlefield would later recall " In the history of pilot reports , Seinfeld has got to be one of the worst of all time " . The memo that summarized the test audience 's reaction , contained feedback such as " No segment of the audience was eager to watch the show again " and " None of the [ supporting characters ] were particularly liked " . Despite the low rating the show received from its test audience , the first public broadcast of " The Seinfeld Chronicles " took place on the fifth of July 1989 , to see how viewers would react , even though the executives had already decided the show would not be picked @-@ up for a full season . " The Seinfeld Chronicles " finished second in its time slot , behind the CBS police drama Jake and the Fatman , receiving a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 9 / 19 , meaning that the pilot was watched by 10 @.@ 9 % of American households , and that 19 % of all televisions in use at the time were tuned into it . With these ratings " The Seinfeld Chronicles " finished in the 21st place of the week it was broadcast , tied with Fox 's Totally Hidden Video . 
 Unlike the test audience , television critics generally reacted positively to the pilot , viewing it as original and innovative , USA Today critic Tom Green summarized the show as a " crisply funny blend of stand @-@ up routines interwoven with more traditional sitcom stuff " . Eric Mink of St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch wrote he thought the show was unusual and intriguing , yet " quite funny " . Joe Stein of the San Diego Evening Tribune commented " Not all standup comedians fit into a sitcom format , but Seinfeld does " . A more negative response came from a The Fresno Bee critic , that stated " I liked the concept , but Seinfeld ' s jokes were so dull that you hoped the standup stuff would fly by so you could get back to the story " . Though the critic praised Alexander 's acting he commented that his performance was not enough to keep the show " from being just another piece of summer drivel offered up by a major commercial network " . 
 Various critics compared the pilot to It 's Garry Shandling 's Show . In his review of the episode The Philadelphia Inquirer critic Ken Tucker commented " Seinfeld 's brisk funniness prevents Chronicles from being a rip @-@ off " , while Jerry Krupnick of The Star @-@ Ledger felt that The Seinfeld Chronicles differentiated itself from It 's Garry <unk> Show by its supporting cast , which he praised . By contrast , John Voorhees of The Seattle Times commented that , though he thought the show was amusing , he considered It 's Garry <unk> Show to be better , and the Houston Chronicle 's Mike McDaniel referred to the pilot as " a not @-@ as @-@ good Garry Shandling @-@ like show " . 
 Most critics reacted with disappointment to the fact that NBC had not picked up the show . Bob <unk> of the Syracuse Herald @-@ Journal commented " What gives ? Comedy this good , and NBC is keeping -- excuse me -- A Different World on the schedule ? " . Ken Tucker stated " NBC is making a mistake if it doesn 't pick up The Seinfeld Chronicles as a midseason replacement ; it 's bound to be superior to most of what the network has planned for the fall " . Additionally casting directors Hirschfeld and Meg Liberman were nominated for a Casting Society of America Artios Award for ' Best Casting for TV , Pilot ' , but lost to the casting directors of Northern Exposure . 
 Though the network executives had decided not to pick up The Seinfeld Chronicles for a first season , some of them were reluctant to give up on it , as they felt the series had potential . Rick Ludwin , one of the show 's greatest supporters , eventually made a deal with Tartikoff , giving up some of his own development money , cancelling a Bob Hope special , so that the entertainment division could order four more episodes of The Seinfeld Chronicles , which formed the rest of the show 's first season . Although this was a very low order number for a new series ( the smallest sitcom order in television history ) , Castle Rock failed to find any other buyers when it tried to sell the show to other networks , and accepted the order . About a year later , the first season would premiere , the show was renamed Seinfeld , to avoid confusion with ABC 's The Marshall Chronicles . To lead in the first official season of Seinfeld , the pilot episode was repeated on June 28 , 1990 ; it received a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 9 / 26 . 
 = William Henry Harrison = 
 William Henry Harrison ( February 9 , 1773 – April 4 , 1841 ) was the ninth President of the United States ( 1841 ) , an American military officer and politician , and the last president born as a British subject . He was also the first president to die in office . He was 68 years , 23 days old when inaugurated , the oldest president to take office until Ronald Reagan in 1981 . Harrison died on his 32nd day in office of complications from pneumonia , serving the shortest tenure in United States presidential history . His death sparked a brief constitutional crisis , but its resolution left unsettled many questions following the presidential line of succession in regard to Constitution until the passage of the 25th Amendment in 1967 . He was the grandfather of Benjamin Harrison , who was the 23rd President from 1889 to 1893 . 
 Before election as president , Harrison served as the first territorial congressional delegate from the Northwest Territory , as governor of the Indiana Territory , and later as a U.S. representative and senator from Ohio . He originally gained national fame for leading U.S. forces against American Indians at the Battle of Tippecanoe in 1811 , where he earned the nickname " Tippecanoe " ( or " Old Tippecanoe " ) . As a general in the subsequent War of 1812 , his most notable action was in the Battle of the Thames in 1813 . This battle resulted in the death of Tecumseh and the dissolution of the Indian coalition which he led . 
 After the war , Harrison moved to Ohio , where he was elected to the United States House of Representatives . In 1824 , the state legislature elected him to the U.S. Senate . He served a truncated term after being appointed as Minister Plenipotentiary to Colombia in May 1828 . In Colombia , he spoke with Simón Bolívar , urging his nation to adopt American @-@ style democracy . 
 Returning to his farm in Ohio , Harrison lived in relative retirement until he was nominated for the presidency in 1836 . Defeated , he retired again to his farm . He was elected president in 1840 , and died of pneumonia in April 1841 , a month after taking office . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 William Henry Harrison was born February 9 , 1773 , the youngest of Benjamin Harrison V and Elizabeth Bassett 's seven children . He was of entirely English descent and his ancestors had all been in Virginia since the 1630s . They were a prominent political family who lived on Berkeley Plantation in Charles City County , Virginia , where he was born . He was the last president born as a British subject before American Independence . His father was a planter and a delegate to the Continental Congress ( 1774 – 1777 ) , who signed the Declaration of Independence . The senior Harrison was governor of Virginia between 1781 and 1784 , during and after the American Revolutionary War . William 's older brother , Carter Bassett Harrison , was elected to the United States House of Representatives from Virginia . 
 In 1787 , at the age of 14 , Harrison entered the Presbyterian Hampden – Sydney College . He attended the school until 1790 , becoming well @-@ versed in Latin and basic French . He was removed by his Episcopalian father , possibly because of a religious revival occurring at the school . He briefly attended a boys ' academy in Southampton County . He allegedly was influenced by antislavery Quakers and Methodists at the school . 
 Angered , his proslavery father had him transfer to Philadelphia for medical training , where Harrison boarded with Robert Morris . The young Harrison entered the University of Pennsylvania in 1790 , where he studied medicine under Dr. Benjamin Rush . As Harrison later told his biographer , he did not enjoy the subject . Shortly after Harrison started these studies , his father died in 1791 , leaving him without funds for further schooling . Eighteen years old , Harrison was left in the guardianship of Morris . 
 = = = Early military career = = = 
 Governor Henry Lee of Virginia , a friend of Harrison 's father , learned of Harrison 's situation after his father 's death and persuaded him to join the army . Within 24 hours of meeting Lee , Harrison was commissioned as an ensign in the U.S. Army , 1st Infantry Regiment at the age of 18 . He was first assigned to Cincinnati in the Northwest Territory , where the army was engaged in the ongoing Northwest Indian War . 
 General " Mad Anthony " Wayne took command of the western army in 1792 following a disastrous defeat under its previous commander , Arthur St. Clair . Harrison was promoted to lieutenant that summer because of his strict attention to discipline , and the following year , he was promoted to serve as aide @-@ de @-@ camp . From Wayne , Harrison learned how to successfully command an army on the American frontier . Harrison participated in Wayne 's decisive victory at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794 , which brought the Northwest Indian War to a successful close for the United States . After the war , Lieutenant Harrison was one of the signatories of the Treaty of Greenville in 1795 , which forced cession of lands by Native Americans and opened much of present @-@ day Ohio to settlement by European Americans . 
 After the death of his mother in 1793 , Harrison inherited a portion of the family 's estate , including about 3 @,@ 000 acres ( 12 km2 ) of land and several slaves . Still in the army at the time , Harrison sold his land to his brother . 
 = = = Marriage and family = = = 
 In 1795 at the age of 22 , Harrison met Anna Tuthill Symmes , of North Bend , Ohio . She was a daughter of Anna Tuthill and Judge John Cleves Symmes , a prominent figure in the state and former representative to the Congress of the Confederation . When Harrison asked the judge for permission to marry Anna , he was refused . The pair waited until Symmes left on business , then they eloped and married on November 25 , 1795 . They married at the North Bend home of Dr. Stephen Wood , Treasurer of the Northwest Territory . The couple honeymooned at Fort Washington , as Harrison was still on duty . Two weeks later , at a farewell dinner for General Wayne , Symmes confronted his new son @-@ in @-@ law for the first time since the wedding , sternly demanding to know how Harrison intended to support a family . Harrison responded , " by my sword , and my own right arm , sir . " Afterward , still concerned about Harrison 's ability to provide for Anna , Symmes sold the young couple 160 acres ( 65 ha ) of land in North Bend . Symmes did not come to accept Harrison until he had achieved fame on the battlefield . 
 Together , the Harrisons had 10 children . Nine lived into adulthood and one died in infancy . Anna was frequently in poor health during the marriage , primarily due to her many pregnancies . She nonetheless outlived William by 23 years , dying at age 88 on February 25 , 1864 . 
 In a biography of Walter Francis White , the noted African American civil rights leader and president of the NAACP in the mid @-@ 20th century , historian Kenneth Robert <unk> notes that White 's mother Madeline Harrison traced some of her mixed @-@ race white ancestry to Harrison in Virginia . Her family holds that <unk> , a female slave belonging to William Henry Harrison , had six children by him , born into slavery . Four were said to be sold to a planter in La Grange , Georgia , including a daughter , Marie Harrison . Marie was Madeline 's mother . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Harrison resigned from the army in 1798 and began campaigning among his friends and family for a post in the Northwest Territorial government . With the aid of his close friend , Secretary of State Timothy Pickering , he was recommended to replace the outgoing Secretary of the Territory . Harrison was appointed to the position , and frequently acted as governor during the absences of Governor Arthur St. Clair . 
 = = = As Member of Congress = = = 
 Harrison had many friends in the elite eastern social circles , and quickly gained a reputation among them as a frontier leader . He ran a successful horse @-@ breeding enterprise that won him acclaim throughout the Northwest Territory . He championed for lower land prices , a primary concern of settlers in the Territory at the time . The U.S. Congress had legislated a territorial land policy that led to high land costs , a policy disliked by many of the territory 's residents . When Harrison ran for Congress , he campaigned to work to alter the situation to encourage migration to the territory . 
 In 1799 , at age 26 , Harrison defeated the son of Arthur St. Clair and was elected as the first delegate representing the Northwest Territory in the Sixth United States Congress . He served from March 4 , 1799 , to May 14 , 1800 . As a delegate from a territory , not a state , he had no authority to vote on bills , but was permitted to serve on a committee , submit legislation , and debate . 
 As delegate , Harrison successfully promoted the passage of the Harrison Land Act . This made it easier for the average settler to buy land in the Northwest Territory by allowing land to be sold in small tracts . The availability of inexpensive land was an important factor in the rapid population growth of the Northwest Territory . Harrison also served on the committee that decided how to divide the Northwest Territory . The committee recommended splitting the territory into two segments , creating the Ohio Territory and the Indiana Territory . The bill , 2 Stat . 58 , passed and the two new territories were established in 1800 . 
 Without informing Harrison , President John Adams nominated him to become governor of the new territory , based on his ties to " the west " and seemingly neutral political stances . Harrison was confirmed by the Senate the following day . Caught unaware , Harrison accepted the position only after receiving assurances from the Jeffersonians that he would not be removed from office after they gained power in the upcoming elections . He then resigned from Congress . The Indiana Territory consisted of the future states of Indiana , Illinois , Michigan , Wisconsin , and the eastern portion of Minnesota . 
 = = = As Governor = = = 
 Harrison moved to Vincennes , the capital of the newly established Indiana Territory , on January 10 , 1801 . While in Vincennes , Harrison built a plantation @-@ style home on his farm that he named Grouseland for its many birds . It was one of the first brick structures in the territory . The home , which has been restored and has become a popular modern tourist attraction , served as the center of social and political life in the territory . He also built a second home near Corydon , the second capital , at Harrison Valley . 
 As governor , Harrison had wide @-@ ranging powers in the new territory , including the authority to appoint all territorial officials , and the territorial legislature , and to control the division of the territory into political districts . A primary responsibility was to obtain title to Indian lands . This would allow European @-@ American settlement to expand and increase U.S. population to enable the region to gain statehood . Harrison was eager to expand the territory for personal reasons as well , as his political fortunes were tied to Indiana 's rise to statehood . In 1803 , President Thomas Jefferson granted Harrison authority to negotiate and conclude treaties with the Indians . 
 Harrison supervised the development of 13 treaties , through which the territory bought more than 60 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 240 @,@ 000 km2 ) of land from Indian leaders , including much of present @-@ day southern Indiana . The 1804 Treaty of St. Louis with <unk> led to the surrender by the Sauk and Meskwaki of much of western Illinois and parts of Missouri . This treaty and loss of lands were greatly resented by many of the Sauk , especially Black Hawk . It was the primary reason the Sauk sided with the United Kingdom during the War of 1812 . Harrison thought the Treaty of Grouseland in 1805 appeased some of the issues for Indians , but tensions remained high on the frontier . 
 The 1809 Treaty of Fort Wayne raised new tensions . Harrison purchased from the Miami tribe , who claimed ownership of the land , more than 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 acres ( 10 @,@ 000 km ² ) of land inhabited by Shawnee , Kickapoo , Wea , and Piankeshaw peoples . Harrison rushed the process by offering large subsidies to the tribes and their leaders so that he could have the treaty in place before President Jefferson left office and the administration changed . The tribes living on the lands were furious and sought to have the treaty overturned , but were unsuccessful . 
 In 1803 , Harrison lobbied Congress to repeal Article 6 of the Northwest Ordinance , to permit slavery in the Indiana Territory . He claimed it was necessary to make the region more appealing to settlers and would make the territory economically viable . Congress suspended the article for 10 years , during which time the territories covered by the ordinance were granted the right to decide for themselves whether to permit slavery . That year , Harrison had the appointed territorial legislature authorize indenturing . He attempted to have slavery legalized outright , in both 1805 and 1807 . This caused a significant stir in the territory . When in 1809 the legislature was popularly elected for the first time , Harrison found himself at odds with them as the abolitionist party came to power . They immediately blocked his plans for slavery and repealed the indenturing laws he had passed in 1803 . 
 President Jefferson , the primary author of the Northwest Ordinance , had made a secret compact with James Lemen to defeat the proslavery movement led by Harrison . Although a slaveholder , he did not want slavery to expand into the Northwest Territory , as he believed the institution should end . Under the " Jefferson @-@ Lemen compact " , Jefferson donated money to Lemen to found churches in Illinois and Indiana to stop the proslavery movement . In Indiana , the founding of an antislavery church led to citizens ' signing a petition and organizing politically to defeat Harrison 's efforts to legalize slavery . Jefferson and Lemen were both instrumental in defeating Harrison 's attempts in 1805 and 1807 to secure approval of slavery in the territory . 
 = = Army general = = 
 = = = Tecumseh and Tippecanoe = = = 
 An Indian resistance movement against U.S. expansion had been growing through the leadership of the Shawnee brothers , Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa ( The Prophet ) . The conflict became known as Tecumseh 's War . Tenskwatawa convinced the native tribes that they would be protected by the Great Spirit and no harm could befall them if they would rise up against the white settlers . He encouraged resistance by telling the tribes to pay white traders only half of what they owed and to give up all the white man 's ways , including their clothing , muskets , and especially whiskey , which was becoming known as evil for American Indians . 
 In August 1810 , Tecumseh led 400 armed warriors down the Wabash River to meet with Harrison in Vincennes . As the warriors were dressed in war paint , their sudden appearance at first frightened the soldiers at Vincennes . The leaders of the group were escorted to Grouseland , where they met Harrison . Tecumseh insisted that the Fort Wayne Treaty was illegitimate . He argued that no one tribe could sell land without the approval of the other tribes ; he asked Harrison to nullify it and warned that Americans should not attempt to settle the lands sold in the treaty . Tecumseh informed Harrison that he had threatened to kill the chiefs who signed the treaty if they carried out its terms , and that his confederation of tribes was growing rapidly . Harrison said the Miami were the owners of the land and could sell it if they so chose . He rejected Tecumseh 's claim that all the Indians formed one nation . He said each tribe could have separate relations with the United States if they chose to . Harrison argued that the Great Spirit would have made all the tribes speak one language if they were to be one nation . 
 Tecumseh launched an " impassioned rebuttal " , but Harrison was unable to understand his language . A Shawnee friendly to Harrison cocked his pistol from the sidelines to alert Harrison that Tecumseh 's speech was leading to trouble . Some witnesses reported that Tecumseh was encouraging the warriors to kill Harrison . Many of the warriors began to pull their weapons , representing a substantial threat to Harrison and the town , which held a population of only 1 @,@ 000 . Harrison pulled his sword . Tecumseh 's warriors backed down after the officers had pulled their firearms in defense of Harrison . Chief <unk> , who was friendly to Harrison , countered Tecumseh 's arguments and told the warriors that since they had come in peace , they should return home in peace . Before leaving , Tecumseh informed Harrison that unless the treaty were nullified , he would seek an alliance with the British . After the meeting , Tecumseh journeyed to meet with many of the tribes in the region , hoping to create a confederation to battle the United States . 
 In 1811 , while Tecumseh was traveling , Harrison was authorized by Secretary of War William Eustis to march against the nascent confederation as a show of force . Harrison led an army of more than 1 @,@ 000 men north to try to intimidate the Shawnee into making peace . Instead , the tribes launched a surprise attack on Harrison 's army early on the morning of November 7 , in what became known as the Battle of Tippecanoe . Harrison defeated the tribal forces at Prophetstown , next to the Wabash and Tippecanoe Rivers . Harrison was hailed as a national hero and the battle became famous . However , his troops had greatly outnumbered the attackers , and suffered many more casualties during the battle . 
 When reporting to Secretary Eustis , Harrison informed him the battle occurred near the Tippecanoe River ( which led to its naming ) , and he feared an imminent reprisal attack . The first dispatch did not make clear which side had won the conflict , and the secretary at first interpreted it as a defeat . The follow @-@ up dispatch made the US victory clear . When no second attack came , the defeat of the Shawnee was more certain . Eustis demanded to know why Harrison had not taken adequate precautions in fortifying his camp against attacks . Harrison countered by saying he had considered the position strong enough . The dispute was the catalyst of a disagreement between Harrison and the Department of War that continued into the War of 1812 . 
 The press did not cover the battle at first , and one Ohio paper misinterpreted Harrison 's dispatch to Eustis to mean he was defeated . By December , as most major American papers carried stories on the battle , public outrage over the Shawnee attack grew . At a time of high tensions with the United Kingdom , many Americans blamed the British for inciting the tribes to violence and supplying them with firearms . In response , Congress passed resolutions condemning the British for interfering in American domestic affairs . A few months later , the U.S. declared war against UK . 
 = = = War of 1812 = = = 
 The outbreak of war with the British in 1812 led to continued conflict with Indians in the Old Northwest , and Harrison was kept in command of the army in Indiana . After the American defeat in the Siege of Detroit , General James Winchester became the commander of the Army of the Northwest . He offered Harrison the rank of brigadier general , which he refused , as he wanted sole command of the army . President James Madison removed Winchester and made Harrison the commander on September 17 , 1812 . Harrison inherited an army of fresh recruits , which he endeavored to drill . Initially , he was greatly outnumbered by the British with their Indian allies . In the winter of 1812 – 13 , Harrison constructed a defensive position at the rapids on the Maumee River in northwest Ohio . He named it Fort Meigs in honor of the Ohio governor , Return J. Meigs , Jr . 
 After receiving reinforcements in 1813 , Harrison took the offensive . He led the army north to battle the Shawnee and their new British allies . He won victories in Indiana and Ohio , and recaptured Detroit , before invading Canada . He defeated the British at the Battle of the Thames , in which Tecumseh was killed . The Battle of the Thames was considered one of the great American victories in the war , second only to the Battle of New Orleans . 
 Secretary of War John Armstrong divided the command of the army , assigning Harrison to a " backwater " post and giving control of the front to one of Harrison 's subordinates . Armstrong and Harrison had disagreed over the lack of coordination and effectiveness in the invasion of Canada . When Harrison was reassigned , he promptly resigned from the army . His resignation was accepted in the summer of 1814 . 
 After the war ended , Congress investigated Harrison 's resignation . It determined that he had been mistreated by the Secretary of War during his campaign and that his resignation was justified . They awarded Harrison a gold medal for his services during the War of 1812 . 
 = = Postwar life = = 
 = = = Public office = = = 
 Harrison returned to North Bend after he was replaced as Governor of Indiana Territory , and he returned his farm to cultivation and enlarged the log cabin farmhouse . In 1814 , he was appointed by President Madison to serve as a commissioner to negotiate two treaties with the Indian tribes in the Northwest . Both treaties were advantageous to the United States , as the tribes ceded a large tract of land in the west . It provided more land for American purchase and settlement . 
 Harrison was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives to finish the term of John McLean of Ohio , serving from October 8 , 1816 , to March 4 , 1819 . He was elected to and served in the Ohio State Senate from 1819 to 1821 , having lost the election for Ohio governor in 1820 . In 1822 , he ran for the U.S. House , but lost by only 500 votes to James W. <unk> . In 1824 , he was elected to the U.S. Senate , where he served until May 20 , 1828 . Fellow westerners in Congress called Harrison a " Buckeye " , a term of affection related to the native Ohio buckeye tree . He was an Ohio presidential elector in 1820 for James <unk> and an Ohio presidential elector in 1824 for Henry Clay . In 1817 , Harrison declined to serve as Secretary of War under President Monroe . 
 Appointed as minister plenipotentiary to Gran Colombia , Harrison resigned from Congress and served in his new post until March 8 , 1829 . He arrived in Bogotá on December 22 , 1828 . He found the condition of Colombia saddening . Harrison reported to the Secretary of State that the country was on the edge of anarchy and he thought Simón Bolívar was about to become a military dictator . While minister in Colombia , Harrison wrote a rebuke to Bolívar , stating " ... the strongest of all governments is that which is most free " . He called on Bolívar to encourage the development of a democracy . In response , Bolívar wrote , " The United States ... seem destined by Providence to plague America with torments in the name of freedom " , a sentiment that achieved fame in Latin America . When the new administration of President Andrew Jackson took office in March 1829 , Harrison was recalled so the new president could make his own appointment to the position . He returned to the United States in June . 
 = = = Private citizen = = = 
 After Harrison returned to the United States in 1829 , he settled on his farm in North Bend , Ohio , his adopted home state . There , he lived in relative retirement after nearly 40 years of continuous government service . Having accumulated no substantial wealth during his lifetime , he subsisted on his savings , a small pension , and the income produced by his farm . Harrison cultivated corn and established a distillery to produce whiskey . After a brief time in the liquor business , he became disturbed by the effects of alcohol on its consumers , and closed the distillery . In a later address to the Hamilton County Agricultural Board in 1831 , Harrison said he had sinned in making whiskey , and hoped that others would learn from his mistake and stop the production of liquors . 
 In these early years , Harrison also earned money from his contributions to a biography written by James Hall , entitled A Memoir of the Public Services of William Henry Harrison , published in 1836 . That year , he made an unsuccessful run for the presidency as a Whig candidate . Between 1836 and 1840 , Harrison served as Clerk of Courts for Hamilton County . This was his job when he was elected president in 1840 . By 1840 , when Harrison campaigned for president a second time , more than 12 books had been published on his life . He was hailed by many as a national hero . 
 = = = 1836 presidential campaign = = = 
 Harrison was the Northern Whig candidate for president in 1836 , one of only two times in American history when a major political party intentionally ran more than one presidential candidate ( the Democrats ran two candidates in 1860 ) . Vice President Martin Van Buren , the Democratic candidate , was popular and deemed likely to win the election against an individual Whig candidate . The Whig plan was to elect popular Whigs regionally , deny Van Buren the 148 electoral votes needed for election , and force the House of Representatives to decide the election . They hoped the Whigs would control the House after the general elections . ( This strategy would have failed , as the Democrats retained a majority in the House following the election . ) 
 Harrison ran in all the free states except Massachusetts , and the slave states of Delaware , Maryland , and Kentucky . Hugh L. White ran in the remaining slave states except for South Carolina . Daniel Webster ran in Massachusetts , and Willie P. Mangum in South Carolina . The plan narrowly failed , as Van Buren won the election with 170 electoral votes . A swing of just over 4 @,@ 000 votes in Pennsylvania would have given that state 's 30 electoral votes to Harrison , and the election would have been decided in the House of Representatives . 
 = = = 1840 presidential campaign = = = 
 Harrison was the Whig candidate ( and again faced Van Buren , now the incumbent president ) in the 1840 election . The Whig party unified behind a single candidate , and Harrison was chosen over more controversial members of the party , such as Clay and Webster . Harrison based his campaign on his military record and on the weak U.S. economy , caused by the Panic of 1837 . In a ploy to blame Van Buren for the depressed economy , the Whigs nicknamed him " Van Ruin " . 
 The Democrats ridiculed Harrison by calling him " Granny Harrison , the petticoat general " , because he resigned from the army before the War of 1812 ended . When asking voters whether Harrison should be elected , they asked them what his name backwards was , which happens to be " No Sirrah " . Democrats cast Harrison as a provincial , out @-@ of @-@ touch old man who would rather " sit in his log cabin drinking hard cider " than attend to the administration of the country . This strategy backfired when Harrison and his vice presidential running mate , John Tyler , adopted the log cabin and hard cider as campaign symbols . They used the images in banners and posters , and created bottles of hard cider that were shaped like log cabins , all to connect to the " common man " . 
 Although Harrison had come from a wealthy , slaveholding Virginia family , in this campaign he was promoted as a humble frontiersman in the style of the popular Andrew Jackson . A memorable example was the Gold Spoon Oration , delivered by a Whig representative . Van Buren , by contrast , was presented as a wealthy elitist . 
 A Whig chant from the time of the election exhibited the difference between candidates : 
 Old Tip he wore a homespun coat , he had no ruffled shirt : wirt @-@ wirt , 
 But Matt he has the golden plate , and he 's a little squirt : wirt @-@ wirt ! 
 People singing the chant would spit tobacco juice while singing " wirt @-@ wirt " . 
 The Whigs boasted of Harrison 's military record and reputation as the hero of the Battle of Tippecanoe . Their campaign slogan , " Tippecanoe and Tyler , too " , became among the most famous in American politics . On election day , Harrison won a landslide electoral college victory , though the popular vote was much closer , at 53 % to 47 % . 
 = = Presidency ( 1841 ) = = 
 = = = Shortest presidency = = = 
 When Harrison came to Washington , he wanted to show both that he was still the steadfast hero of Tippecanoe , and that he was a better educated and thoughtful man than the backwoods caricature ascribed to him in the campaign . He took the oath of office on March 4 , 1841 , a cold and wet day . He wore neither an overcoat nor hat , rode on horseback to the ceremony rather than in the closed carriage that had been offered him , and delivered the longest inaugural address in American history . At 8 @,@ 445 words , it took him nearly two hours to read , although his friend and fellow Whig Daniel Webster had edited it for length . Harrison then rode through the streets in the inaugural parade , and that evening attended three inaugural balls , including one at Carusi 's Saloon entitled the " Tippecanoe " ball , which at a price of US $ 10 per person ( equal to $ 229 today ) attracted 1000 guests . 
 The inaugural address was a detailed statement of the Whig agenda , essentially a repudiation of Jackson and Van Buren 's policies . Harrison promised to reestablish the Bank of the United States and extend its capacity for credit by issuing paper currency ( Henry Clay 's American system ) ; to defer to the judgment of Congress on legislative matters , with sparing use of his veto power ; and to reverse Jackson 's spoils system of executive patronage . He promised to use patronage to create a qualified staff , not to enhance his own standing in government . 
 As leader of the Whigs and a powerful legislator ( as well as a frustrated presidential candidate in his own right ) , Clay expected to have substantial influence in the Harrison administration . He ignored his own platform plank of overturning the " spoils " system . Clay attempted to influence Harrison 's actions before and during his brief presidency , especially in putting forth his own preferences for Cabinet offices and other presidential appointments . Harrison rebuffed his aggression , saying " Mr. Clay , you forget that I am the President . " The dispute intensified when Harrison named Daniel Webster , Clay 's arch @-@ rival , for control of the Whig Party , as his Secretary of State , and appeared to give Webster 's supporters some highly coveted patronage positions . Harrison 's sole concession to Clay was to name his protégé John J. Crittenden to the post of Attorney General . Despite this , the dispute continued until the President 's death . 
 Clay was not the only one who hoped to benefit from Harrison 's election . Hordes of office applicants came to the White House , which was then open to all who wanted a meeting with the President . Most of Harrison 's business during his month @-@ long presidency involved extensive social obligations — an inevitable part of his high position and arrival in Washington — and receiving visitors at the White House . They awaited him at all hours and filled the Executive Mansion . Harrison wrote in a letter dated March 10 , " I am so much harassed by the multitude that call upon me that I can give no proper attention to any business of my own . " Nevertheless , Harrison sent a number of nominations for office to the Senate for confirmation during his month in office . The new 27th Congress had convened an extraordinary session for the purpose of confirming Harrison 's cabinet and other important nominees ; since a number of them arrived after Congress ' March 15 adjournment , however , John Tyler would ultimately be forced to renominate many of Harrison 's selections . 
 Harrison took his pledge to reform executive appointments very seriously , visiting each of the six executive departments to observe its operations and issuing through Webster an order to all departments that electioneering by employees would henceforth be considered grounds for dismissal . As he had with Clay , Harrison resisted pressure from other Whigs over partisan patronage . When a group arrived in his office on March 16 to demand the removal of all Democrats from any appointed office , Harrison proclaimed , " So help me God , I will resign my office before I can be guilty of such an iniquity ! " Harrison 's own cabinet attempted to countermand the president 's appointment of John Chambers as Governor of Iowa in favor of Webster 's friend , General James Wilson ; when Webster attempted to press this decision at a March 25 cabinet meeting , however , Harrison asked him to read aloud a handwritten note ( which said simply " William Henry Harrison , President of the United States " ) , then announced that " William Henry Harrison , President of the United States , tells you , gentlemen , that , by God , John Chambers shall be governor of Iowa ! " 
 Harrison 's only official act of consequence was to call Congress into a special session . Henry Clay and he had disagreed over the necessity of such a session , and when on March 11 Harrison 's cabinet proved evenly divided , the president vetoed the idea . When Clay pressed Harrison on the special session on March 13 , the president rebuffed his counsel and told him not to visit the White House again , but to address him only in writing . A few days later , however , Treasury Secretary Thomas Ewing reported to Harrison that federal funds were in such trouble that the government could not continue to operate until Congress ' regularly scheduled session in December ; Harrison thus relented , and on March 17 proclaimed the special session in the interests of " the condition of the revenue and finance of the country " . The session was scheduled to begin on May 31 . 
 = = = Administration and cabinet = = = 
 = = Death and funeral = = 
 On March 26 , Harrison became ill with a cold . According to the prevailing medical misconception of that time , his illness was believed to be directly caused by the bad weather at his inauguration ; however , Harrison 's illness did not arise until more than three weeks after the event . 
 The cold worsened , rapidly turning to pneumonia and pleurisy . He sought to rest in the White House , but could not find a quiet room because of the steady crowd of office seekers . His extremely busy social schedule made any rest time scarce . 
 Harrison 's doctors tried cures , applying opium , castor oil , leeches , and Virginia snakeweed , but the treatments only made Harrison worse , and he became delirious . He died nine days after becoming ill , at 12 : 30 am on April 4 , 1841 . Harrison 's doctor , Thomas Miller , diagnosed Harrison 's cause of death as " pneumonia of the lower lobe of the right lung " , but a 2014 medical analysis concluded that he instead died of enteric fever . The authors base their findings on the president 's symptoms and the close proximity of the White House to a dumping ground for sewage and human waste . 
 He was the first United States president to die in office . His last words were to his doctor , but assumed to be directed at John Tyler , " Sir , I wish you to understand the true principles of the government . I wish them carried out . I ask nothing more . " Harrison served the shortest term of any American president : March 4 – April 4 , 1841 , 30 days , 12 hours , and 30 minutes . 
 Harrison 's funeral took place in the Wesley Chapel in Cincinnati , Ohio , on April 7 , 1841 . His original interment was in the public vault of the Congressional Cemetery in Washington , D.C. He was later buried in North Bend , Ohio . The William Henry Harrison Tomb State Memorial was erected in his honor . 
 = = = Impact of death = = = 
 Harrison 's death was a disappointment to Whigs , who hoped to pass a revenue tariff and enact measures to support Henry Clay 's American system . John Tyler , Harrison 's successor and a former Democrat , abandoned the Whig agenda , effectively cutting himself off from the party . 
 Due to the death of Harrison , three Presidents served within a single calendar year ( Martin Van Buren , Harrison , Tyler ) . This has happened on only one other occasion , 40 years later in 1881 , when Rutherford B. Hayes was succeeded by James A. Garfield , who was assassinated later in that year . With the death of Garfield , Chester A. Arthur stepped into the presidency . 
 Harrison 's death revealed the flaws in the constitution 's clauses on presidential succession . Article II of the Constitution states , " In case of the removal of the President from office , or of his death , resignation , or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office , the same shall devolve on the Vice President ... and [ the Vice President ] shall act accordingly , until the disability be removed , or a President shall be elected " . Scholars at the time disagreed whether the vice president would become president or merely acting President . The Constitution did not stipulate whether the Vice President could serve the remainder of the President 's term , until the next election , or if emergency elections should be held . 
 Harrison 's cabinet insisted that Tyler was " Vice President acting as President " . After the cabinet consulted with the Chief Justice Roger Taney , they decided that if Tyler took the presidential Oath of Office , he would assume the office of President . Tyler obliged and was sworn in on April 6 . In May , Congress convened . After a short period of debate in both houses , it passed a resolution that confirmed Tyler in the presidency for the remainder of Harrison 's term . Once established , this precedent of presidential succession remained in effect until the Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment was ratified in 1967 . Following the assassination of John F. Kennedy and the succession of Lyndon B. Johnson to the presidency in 1963 , the Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment dealt with the finer points of succession . It defined in what situations the Vice President was acting President , and in what situation the Vice President could become President . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Harrison was the first sitting President to have his photograph taken , on Inauguration Day in 1841 . Photographs exist of John Quincy Adams , Andrew Jackson , and Martin van Buren , but those images were all taken after these men had ceased to be President . The Harrison image was also the first of these photographs to be taken . The original daguerreotype , made in Washington on his Inauguration Day , has been lost — although at least one early photographic copy exists in the archives of the Metropolitan Museum of Art . 
 Harrison 's chief presidential legacy lies in his campaigning methods , which laid the foundation for the modern presidential campaign tactics . Harrison died nearly penniless . Congress voted to give his wife a Presidential widow 's pension , a payment of $ 25 @,@ 000 , one year of Harrison 's salary . This is equivalent to $ 573 @,@ 468 today . She also received the right to mail letters free of charge . 
 Harrison 's son John Scott Harrison served in the U.S. House of Representatives from Ohio between 1853 and 1857 . Harrison 's grandson , Benjamin Harrison of Indiana , was the 23rd president , from 1889 to 1893 , making them the only grandparent – grandchild pair of Presidents . 
 Numerous places were named after Harrison : 
 Harrison , Michigan 
 Harrison , New Jersey 
 Harrison , Ohio 
 Harrison , Tennessee 
 Harrison County , Indiana 
 Harrison County , Mississippi 
 Harrison County , Iowa 
 Harrison County , Ohio 
 Three schools were named William Henry Harrison High School ( in Evansville and West Lafayette , Indiana and Harrison , Ohio ) in his honor . 
 During the American Civil War , the Union Army named a post near Cincinnati Camp Harrison . , and a military fort in Montana was named for him . Because of his short service , no military vessel was named after him as President . 
 A statue of Harrison was erected on Monument Circle in Indianapolis . Additionally , Harrison is shown ( on the left , facing the building ) in a pediment on the Tippecanoe County Courthouse , Lafayette , Indiana , 1882 . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = The Land of Green Plums = 
 The Land of Green Plums ( German : Herztier ) is a novel by Herta Müller , published in 1994 by <unk> Verlag . Perhaps Müller 's best @-@ known work , the story portrays four young people living in a totalitarian police state under the Soviet @-@ imposed communist dictatorship in Romania , ending with their emigration to Germany . The narrator is an unidentified young woman belonging to the ethnic German minority . Müller said the novel was written " in memory of my Romanian friends who were killed under the Ceauşescu regime " . 
 Like many of Müller 's books , The Land of Green Plums illustrates the position of dissidents from the German minority in Romania , who suffered a double oppression under the regime of Nicolae Ceauşescu . The rural German @-@ speaking community tries to preserve its culture by enforcing traditional rules ; once the main characters escape this environment through university study in the city , they suffer , as political dissidents , the oppression exercised by the totalitarian regime . Those who flee the country for Germany become cultural outcasts : they are not considered German there but rather Eastern Europeans . Critics read the novel as testifying to abuse and the ensuing trauma . Normal human relationships are rendered impossible by the lack of freedom of expression ; the threat of violence , imprisonment , and execution ; and the possibility that any personal friend may be a traitor . Written in a paratactic style , full of flashbacks and time shifts , the language of the book reflects trauma and political oppression . 
 After its publication in German and its translation into Dutch , the novel received moderate attention . It gained an international audience when the English translation by Michael Hofmann was published in 1996 . In 1998 this translation won the International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award , the largest prize given for a single work of fiction published in English . Following the announcement that Müller was awarded the 2009 Nobel Prize in Literature , The Land of Green Plums entered the bestseller list on Amazon.com. 
 = = Plot = = 
 The first character introduced to the reader is a girl named Lola , who shares a college dormitory room with five other girls , including the narrator . Lola records her experiences in a diary , relating her efforts to escape from the totalitarian world of school and society . She rides the buses at night and has brutish , anonymous sex with men returning home from factory work . She also has an affair with the gym teacher , and soon joins the Communist Party . This first part of the book ends when Lola is found dead , hanging in the closet ; she has left her diary in the narrator 's suitcase . 
 Having supposedly committed suicide and thus betrayed her country and her party , Lola is publicly denounced in a school ceremony . Soon after , the narrator shares Lola 's diary with three male friends , Edgar , Georg , and Kurt ; Lola 's life becomes an escape for them as they attend college and engage in mildly subversive activities — " harbouring unsuitable German books , humming scraps of banned songs , writing to one another in crude code , taking photographs of the blacked @-@ out buses which carry prisoners between the prison and the construction sites . " The four are from German @-@ speaking communities ; all receive mail from their mothers complaining about their various illnesses and how their children 's <unk> is causing them trouble ; all have fathers who had been members of the Nazi SS in Romania during World War II . They hide the diary and other documents , including photographs and books , in the well of a deserted summerhouse in town . Very quickly it becomes clear that an officer of the Securitate , Captain Pjele , is interested in the four ; he begins to subject them to regular interrogations . Their possessions are searched , their mail opened , and they are threatened by the captain and his dog . 
 After graduation the four go their separate ways , but they remain in contact through letters and regular visits , although their letters are read by the Securitate . They take menial jobs : Kurt works in a slaughterhouse as a supervisor , for instance ; and the narrator translates German manuals in a factory . A fifth member , Tereza , befriends the narrator even as it becomes clear that she is acting partly on Pjele 's orders . 
 The lives of all five become more miserable , and each conforms to the regime 's demands even as they lose their jobs for apparently political reasons . They discuss fleeing the country , and Georg is the first to do so . Weeks after he arrives in Germany , he is found dead from a fall from the window of a Frankfurt hotel . The narrator and Edgar likewise acquire passports and go to Germany , but continue to receive death threats after emigrating . Kurt remains in Romania , no longer working ; he is later found hanged . The novel ends with the same passage as it began : " When we don 't speak , said Edgar , we become unbearable , and when we do , we make fools of ourselves " . 
 = = Characters = = 
 The narrator , Edgar , Georg , and Kurt hail from similar backgrounds . All are German Romanian and students at the same university . They all suffer persecution , and oppose the regime . The characters — especially Edgar , Georg , and Kurt — are quite deliberately not developed in great detail , as noted by critics . " Characterization is not the point here . Müller is primarily a poet " , and this poetic interest likewise is said to explain the lack of chapter organization and of transitional phrases . Only two of the six main characters who suffer oppression survive at the end of the book : Lola dies by hanging , Georg commits suicide after fleeing to Germany , Kurt is found hanged , and Tereza , the narrator 's friend who betrays her to the Securitate , dies of cancer . 
 = = Genre = = 
 = = = Autobiography = = = 
 The novel is partly autobiographical . Like her narrator , Müller comes from the German @-@ speaking minority in Romania , the Banat Swabians , with a father who had been former SS man during World War II . Trained as a teacher , she lost her position after refusing to cooperate with the Securitate . She emigrated to Germany in 1987 . In a 1998 interview she mentioned that real persons can be recognized in some of her characters , including one in The Land of Green Plums : " That [ recognition of characters ] was already the case in my previous book [ The Land of the Green Plums ] . Because my best girlfriend died young , and because she had betrayed me , and because I had to despise her and could not stop loving her . " 
 In an earlier interview with the Danish newspaper Politiken , <unk> went into greater detail about her friend , portrayed as Tereza in this novel : 
 I had a good friend in Romania , who came and visited me in Germany , when I had finally escaped from the country . She was in the service of the Securitate , as it turned out . She had left her passport lying out , and I saw it by chance one morning , when she was out . No ordinary person had such a passport with visas to Greece , to Italy , and Spain . She confessed everything , and shortly after I naturally had to throw her out . This happened in the same period that I was receiving death threats like many others who had fled from Romania , and I kept far away from Romanians I did not know or could not count on . But she was my friend . 
 = = = Allegory = = = 
 The novel approaches allegory in many of its details , such as the green plums of the title . Mothers warn their children not to eat green , unripe plums , claiming that they are poisonous . Yet the novel regularly depicts police officers gorging themselves on the fruit : " The officers ' lack of constraint in engulfing the fruit parallels the remorseless persecution of the human race " under Nicolae Ceauşescu . The green plums also suggest childhood , or regression into childhood : " The narrator watches the Romanian police guards in the streets of the city as they greedily pocket green plums ... ' They reverted to childhood , stealing plums from village trees . ' Ms. Muller 's vision of a police state manned by plum thieves reads like a kind of fairy tale on the mingled evils of gluttony , stupidity and brutality . " 
 = = Language and style = = 
 Critics have recognized Müller 's writing as political , " as a form of manifest resistance against totalitarian claims to power , " and have studied her " complex and ambiguous imagery . " According to Larry Wolff , reviewing the book for The New York Times , the poetic quality of the language is essentially connected to its author 's objective : " the author seeks to create a sort of poetry out of the spiritual and material ugliness of life in Communist Romania . " Critics have generally shown appreciation for the novel 's language , as did Nicholas Lezard , writing in The Guardian : 
 The prose , while simple at the level of the sentence ( and we can safely assume that Hofmann 's translation is very faithful to the original ) , is shifty , blurred , to the point where at times we are left unsure as to what exactly is going on – a deliberate flight from causation , quite understandable in a country where everyone ( even , we learn , the horses ) has been driven mad by fear . 
 Though the novel 's language , and Müller 's language in general , is praised for its <unk> Englund , secretary of the Swedish Academy , noted her " extreme precision with words " — many things are left unsaid . As a reviewer for The Australian noted , the narrator is never named , the words " totalitarian " and " liberty " never appear in the book , and even <unk> , usually referred to as the " dictator , " is named only twice , first when one of the characters ( a Jewish WWII survivor ) notes how the greeting " <unk> " is also the first syllable of the dictator 's name , and again when a comparison is made between <unk> , Hitler , and Stalin . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Trauma = = = 
 Psychological trauma caused by fear permeates the novel : " Fear , isolation , and abandonment characterize the lives of the first @-@ person narrator and her three friends .... Müller describes how fear acquires a life of its own ; it becomes independent of the subject 's will . " One critic argues that " Herztier was written in response to the trauma of life under the Ceauşescu dictatorship , when the citizens of Romania lived in constant fear of the secret police or Securitate . " As Müller said in an interview , this fear in the novel is autobiographical as well . 
 According to Beverley Driver Eddy , The Land of Green Plums presents trauma as well as its testimony ; the narrator gives her own testimony , and relates it to the testimony of her friends ' suffering . The first of these is Lola , the friend who supposedly kills herself ; her testimony is preserved in her diary , in which she wrote of her animalistic sexual exploits with nameless men and her struggle to cope with the guilt of having joined the Communist Party in an effort to better herself . For the narrator , preserving Lola 's notebook ( and sharing it with her three friends ) becomes of paramount importance , especially since the memory of Lola was erased days after her death by the Party establishment . Additional complexity comes from Lola 's testimony being interwoven in the narrator 's own — " a testimony within a testimony . " In an interview published in 1998 , Müller said that " she is concerned with showing that the childhood experiences have been internalised by the narrator , and that the traumas of the frightened , non @-@ conformist child are replicated to the larger traumas of the adult dissident . " In the image of the weeds cut down by the narrator 's father , an image presented early in the novel , the parallel between the father and the dictator is evidenced : " both ' make cemeteries ' without fear of retribution . " One symptom of the trauma this causes in its victims is disconnection , the strain of friendship resulting from lack of trust , disrupting normal human relationships for the remainder of the victim 's life . Müller 's novel portrays this disconnection and the ongoing trauma for survivors , even after the fall of the dictatorship . 
 Other critics have focused on different effects of trauma in the novel and in Müller 's work in general . Lyn Marven argues that the Müller 's poetics and style , characterized by paratactic as well as syntactic and narrative gaps , illustrates one of the effects of trauma : 
 " Trauma disrupts the structures of memory .... Trauma cannot be integrated into narrative memory and exists only as a gap or blank spot ; it therefore cannot be articulated , and returns in the form of surprisingly literal flashbacks , hallucinations , or dreams . " 
 Marven notes another effect : a " distorted body image " that often gives rise to a " radical metonymy , " a fragmentation , surfacing most notably in a scene where Pjele , during an interrogation , lists the narrator 's clothes and possessions , to which the narrator responds by listing her own body parts : " 1 pr. eyes , 1 pr. ears , 1 nose , 1 pr. lips , 1 neck . " Marven notes that Müller 's collages , which the critic says are " central to Müller 's œuvre , " show the same fragmentation , and says that her " increasingly readable " prose , coupled with recent collages moving toward narrative , might suggest that there is " a possibility of overcoming trauma . " ( <unk> <unk> also noted that Müller 's prose is developing from parataxis toward more complicated syntax . ) 
 = = = Banat @-@ Swabians = = = 
 The situation of the Banat @-@ Swabians , the German @-@ speaking minority in Romania , is a recurring theme in Müller 's writing . Historically , Germans were recruited by the Austria @-@ Hungary to repopulate southern areas following the expulsion of the Turks of the Ottoman Empire . They were given special privileges , allowed to keep their language and Roman Catholicism , even in areas in which the Orthodox Church was paramount . Their communities spoke German into the 20th century . They were among ethnic Germans , or Volksdeutsche , whom Adolph Hitler proposed to unite in a greater Germany . Millions of ethnic Germans were expelled from eastern Europe after the war ; thousands were forced into labor camps . Even years later , they were often discriminated against in Romania under the communist government . 
 By the late 20th century , their status is one of the central themes of The Land of Green Plums ; this idea is explored in detail in Valentine Glajar 's 1997 article " Banat @-@ Swabian , Romanian , and German : Conflicting Identities in Herta Müller 's Herztier . " The Banat @-@ Swabian community , of which the narrator is a member , was described by Müller as extremely ethnocentric . Following persecution after the war , while remaining survivors had no desire to emigrate to Germany , they exerted an almost totalitarian control , especially on their children to keep them within their community . Müller had already addressed this topic in her first work , <unk> , translated as <unk> in English , in which the German community holds on to its language and habits in an attempt to deny the Romanian dictatorship that rules them . One critic characterized this communal attempt in <unk> as a " mechanistically followed tradition " . 
 According to Glajar , this is the world of the narrator 's mother , who writes of her sicknesses in her letters in the hope of keeping her daughter emotionally connected to her home village . The narrator 's father was a member of the SS ( as were Müller 's father and uncle ) , and is a troubling example of <unk> . The novel proposes a tension inside Romania between the culturally totalitarian atmosphere of the Banat @-@ Swabian community and the politically totalitarian world of Timişoara , where the main characters attend college — between German and Romanian . But the main characters who move to Germany quickly discover that although they were German in Romania , they are Romanian in Germany . They face new social , cultural and linguistic difficulties . Georg commits suicide a few weeks after his arrival in Frankfurt . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Academic interest = = = 
 The book attracted academic interest , and scholars discussed it in at least three distinct categories : language and style , often in relation to the politics of totalitarianism ; trauma studies , given the psychological pressure on the novel 's characters , who grow up under a totalitarian regime ; and ethnographic and literary studies of the German minority in Romania . On the latter topic , Valentine Glajar , now at Texas State University , published an article in 1997 . Müller 's Herztier is one of the four titles discussed in Glajar 's 2004 monograph The German Legacy , on German @-@ language literature from Eastern Europe . 
 = = = Attention in the press = = = 
 In the German press , the novel 's publication generated modest but positive attention . Rolf Michaelis reviewed the novel at length in Die Zeit in October 1994 , analyzing the function of fear and praising the book as a " poetic epic " , comparing transitions and structure to those found in Homer . " Herta Müller " , he wrote , " does not simply use the German language ; she makes it her own , in an incomparable way . She invents her own language . " A favorable review of the Dutch translation appeared in the national daily newspaper <unk> in 1996 . 
 The English translation was likewise favorably reviewed : a review in The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune said " this heartbreaking tale is bitter and dark , yet beautiful " . Larry Wolff , in his review for The New York Times , described the book as " a novel of graphically observed detail in which the author seeks to create a sort of poetry out of the spiritual and material ugliness of life in Communist Romania " . 
 Radio Free Europe reported that the novel is a favorite of Mohammad @-@ Ali Abtahi , the Iranian pro @-@ democracy activist , who read it ( in the Persian translation by <unk> Mirza @-@ Saleh ) shortly after being released from prison in 2009 . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = IMPAC Award = = = 
 The novel and its English translation won the 1998 International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award ; Müller received £ 75 @,@ 000 , and translator Michael Hofmann £ 25 @,@ 000 . In its comments , the jury remarked on the main themes of the novel — politics , language , and allegory , saying : 
 The novel brilliantly evokes a world of cruelty and oppression . Set in Communist Romania under the <unk> dictatorship , The Land of Green Plums portrays the lives of a group of dissident students and teachers whose integrity is continuously assailed and sometimes betrayed . Herta Müller 's stark and vivid prose explores a terror @-@ stricken society of mendacity and political slander . The " green plums " of the title stand in part for truth and its brutal suppression in a world of interrogators and informers , where speaking out can become a matter of life and death . 
 The author 's style , achieves a spartan eloquence , and the novel 's individual characters are powerfully drawn . 
 This elegantly understated book is at once bleak and beautiful , humorous and heartbreaking . 
 The IMPAC award drew attention to the novel , and by the end of the year , it had been published in paperback in the US by Hydra Books / Northwestern University Press . 
 = = = 2009 Nobel Prize in Literature = = = 
 In 2009 , Herta Müller won the Nobel Prize in Literature . During the presentation ceremony , Anders Olsson , member of the Swedish Academy , referred to The Land of Green Plums as " a masterful account of the flight of a group of youths from the terror regime " . Immediately following the announcement , sales of this and Müller 's other novels ( five had been translated into English by then ) skyrocketed : " On Thursday morning , when the award was announced , The Land of Green Plums , by all accounts Müller 's best book , was No. 56 @,@ 359 on Amazon.com ; by the close of business that day , it was No. 7 " . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 The Land of Green Plums is the second novel published by Müller since leaving Romania , after Der Fuchs war <unk> schon der Jäger ( 1992 ) . It appeared in German in 1994 , followed by the English translation in 1996 . The hardback was published in the United States by Metropolitan Books in November 1996 . A Dutch translation was published in 1996 . Although French @-@ language Swiss media had shown interest in the author , the novel had not been translated into French by 1998 After the IMPAC award , paperback editions of Hoffman 's translation were published in the United Kingdom by Granta later that year and again in September 1999 ( with new cover art . ) It was published in the United States by Northwestern University Press in November 1998 . In November 2010 , after Müller had won the Nobel Prize for Literature , a paperback was released in the United Kingdom and the United States by Picador . 
 = Golden Film = 
 The Golden Film ( Dutch : Gouden Film ) is a film award recognizing domestic box office achievements in the Netherlands . The Golden Film is awarded to films from the Netherlands once they have sold 100 @,@ 000 tickets . The award is an initiative by the Netherlands Film Festival and the Netherlands Film Fund to increase media attention for Dutch films . For each awarded film there is one trophy for the film crew and another for the film cast . 
 When the Golden Film was introduced in 2001 , it was awarded to films once they had sold 75 @,@ 000 tickets . In the following years , the public 's interest in Dutch films in the Netherlands had increased . In 2003 , the audience criterion was increased to 100 @,@ 000 tickets in an effort to further stimulate the Dutch film industry . Since its introduction , the Golden Film has been awarded to 62 films . 
 While the cast and crew have considered their receiving films to be successful , critics have said that films that sold only 75 @,@ 000 or 100 @,@ 000 tickets cannot be considered a commercial success . For this reason the fact that Dutch newspapers report about this award is also criticized . 
 = = Award = = 
 A Golden Film is awarded to a film from the Netherlands once it has sold 100 @,@ 000 cinema tickets in the Netherlands during the original cinema circulation . The number of tickets sold is based on box office information provided by the film 's distributor and the Netherlands Association of Film Distributors . After a film is awarded the Golden Film , it can receive a Platinum Film after it sells 400 @,@ 000 tickets and a Diamond Film after it sells 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 tickets . In addition to these awards , there is the Crystal Film , which is awarded to documentary films that sell more than 10 @,@ 000 tickets . 
 The Golden Film is an initiative by the Netherlands Film Festival and the government @-@ subsidized Netherlands Film Fund , with the support of Film Investors Netherlands , to increase the public 's awareness of Dutch films in the Netherlands . The Golden Film recognises box office achievements to encourage positive publicity for a film after the initial media attention surrounding its release has begun to wane . The award is similar to the Dutch music industry 's Golden Record , that is awarded after selling 40 @,@ 000 singles , 35 @,@ 000 popular music albums , or 15 @,@ 000 classical music albums . 
 The Golden Film awards are presented during small press ceremonies throughout the year and shortly after a film has reached the audience criterion . The trophies are presented by the director of the Netherlands Film Festival or sometimes by a member of the crew or cast of the film itself . Two trophies are presented for each film : one to the film crew , represented by the producer and the director , and the other to the cast of the film , represented by the lead actors . 
 The trophy was designed by Jeroen <unk> and consists of a thick square frame , containing a film frame of the awarded movie . The outer frame is made of milled wood , which has a plate attached to it , on the first line inscribed with the text " Gouden Film " , three squares , and the year , and on the second line with the film 's title . 
 = = History = = 
 The Netherlands Film Festival and the Netherlands Film Fund announced the Golden Film on September 4 , 2001 . At that time , the Golden Film was awarded to films from the Netherlands once they had been seen by a paying audience of 75 @,@ 000 or more . The Platinum Film was introduced at the same moment , for films with paying audiences of 200 @,@ 000 or more . The first Golden Film was awarded on September 28 , 2001 to I Love You Too ( 2001 ) , and by the end of 2002 a total of 10 Golden Films had been awarded . 
 Within 18 months of the award 's introduction , the public 's interest in Dutch films in the Netherlands had increased . The audience for Dutch films as a percentage of the total cinema audience in the Netherlands was 5 @.@ 5 % in 1999 and 5 @.@ 9 % in 2000 . In 2001 , the year of the award 's introduction , audiences increased to 9 @.@ 5 % . And in 2002 , the audience for Dutch films further increased to 10 @.@ 5 % . 
 In 2003 , the criterion for the award was changed in an effort to further stimulate the Dutch film industry . Films released after January 1 , 2003 had to reach paying audiences of 100 @,@ 000 to qualify for the Golden Film and 400 @,@ 000 for the Platinum Film . All films that had received a Golden Film before 2003 would also have received a Golden Film under the new criterion . From 2003 until 2007 , the percentage of cinema visitors in the Netherlands who watched a Dutch film was between 9 @.@ 20 % and 13 @.@ 4 % . 
 Since its introduction , the Golden Film has been awarded to 62 films . In 2008 , fourteen films were awarded the Golden Film , the highest number to have received the award in a single year . Most of the films that are awarded the Golden Film have taken a week or more to reach the target audience figure . Only Full Moon Party ( 2002 ) and Black Book ( 2006 ) have reached the criterion , for respectively 75 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 visitors , during their opening weekends . 
 = = Response to the award = = 
 Recipients consider the Golden Film to be an award given to films that are a success . Director Martin Koolhoven said , when Schnitzel Paradise ( 2005 ) received the award , that he did not expect his film to be such a success . Schnitzel Paradise was his first commercially successful film . Fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Sem <unk> , lead actress in the film Keep Off ( 2006 ) , said she knew that many people had seen the film , but she did not expect it to receive a Golden Film . 
 Critics of the award have said that films which have sold only 75 @,@ 000 or 100 @,@ 000 tickets cannot be considered commercially successful . In 2002 , film journalist Ronald <unk> said about the Golden Film : 
 <unk> also wrote that the Golden Film is a " child of our time " because it tries to reduce the value of a film to its commercial success , and it is supporting films that already have large publicity budgets instead of smaller and more vulnerable productions . Film producer Rob <unk> has said that he believes the Golden Film is the prize for a commercial flop . In 2005 , when the criterion for the award had already been increased from 75 @,@ 000 to 100 @,@ 000 visitors , he said in an interview : 
 Dutch newspapers , such as Algemeen Dagblad , De Telegraaf , and NRC Handelsblad , have reported about films receiving the Golden Film . When the film De <unk> van Bontekoe ( 2007 ) had drawn 100 @,@ 000 visitors to the cinema , the Dutch news agency Algemeen Nederlands <unk> said the film had reached " the magical threshold of 100 @,@ 000 " . 
 = Music of The Last of Us = 
 The music for the 2013 action @-@ adventure survival horror video game The Last of Us , developed by Naughty Dog and published by Sony Computer Entertainment , was composed by musician Gustavo Santaolalla . Supplementary music for the game 's downloadable content The Last of Us : Left Behind was composed by Santaolalla , Andrew Buresh , Anthony Caruso and Jonathan Mayer . Both soundtracks were produced by Santaolalla , Mayer , and Aníbal Kerpel , with separate segments recorded in both Los Angeles and Nashville . Santaolalla , known for his minimalist approach to composing , was excited to work on the soundtrack due to the game 's focus on the characters and story . He began composing the music early in the game 's development , with few instructions from the development team on the tone that they intended . In collaboration with each other , the team and Santaolalla aimed to make the soundtrack emotional , as opposed to scary . Santaolalla used various instruments to compose the score , including some that were unfamiliar to him . 
 The soundtrack album for The Last of Us was released on iTunes in June 2013 . Additional compositions , including some composed for Left Behind , were released on a second soundtrack in February 2014 . Critical reception to the soundtracks was positive , as reviewers felt that the music connected appropriately with the gameplay . In particular , critics felt that the minimalist approach of the soundtrack 's composition matched the gameplay . The game 's music was nominated for numerous awards . Several tracks became popular and begot cover versions and live performances . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 During the initial development of The Last of Us , creative director Neil Druckmann and game director Bruce Straley compiled musical tracks that they found inspirational . When searching for a composer to work on the game 's music , they realised that Gustavo Santaolalla composed many of their compiled tracks . Straley described Santaolalla 's music as " organic instrumentation , minimalist , dissonance and resonance with the sounds " . The composer agreed to work on the game 's soundtrack when contacted by Sony . After hearing the game 's pitch , Santaolalla was excited to work on the game ; he had previously wanted to compose for video games , but refused to work on those without a focus on story and characters . 
 Santaolalla began work on The Last of Us early in its development . Druckmann did not give him specific directions but offered him the game 's stories and themes . Santaolalla appreciated this freedom and felt it assisted his process . He felt the need to " go into some more dark place , more textural and not necessarily melodic " , when composing . The composer prefers to compose as he records , as he has little knowledge of reading and writing sheet music . To challenge himself , Santaolalla used a variety of unique instruments that were new to him , giving " an element of danger and innocence " . For The Last of Us , he used a detuned guitar , producing deep noise . To produce unique sounds , Santaolalla recorded in various rooms , including a bathroom and kitchen . The team wanted the game 's AI to affect the music . They also tried to make the music evoke a reaction from the player , as their familiarization with the sounds would trigger a previous emotion that they felt . Music manager Jonathan Mayer felt that the game 's action music was atypical for video game action music , stating that it is " relatively low @-@ key " , and that taking it out of context changes the immediate reaction to it . The game 's theme , " The Last of Us " , was the first piece of music that the team received , and they were very impressed . With the music , the team aimed to " get emotion " , as opposed to " horror " . Inspired by the sparing use of music in the film No Country for Old Men ( 2007 ) , the team used music judiciously and tried to find other ways to " make your palms sweaty " . The orchestral portions of the score were recorded at Ocean Way Studios in Nashville by the Nashville Scoring Orchestra . 
 Aside from the official soundtracks , licensed tracks also appear in the game . In the main game , during the section titled " Alone and Forsaken " , Joel and Ellie listen to the songs " I 'll Never Get Out of This World Alive " and " Alone and Forsaken " , both by Hank Williams . In the downloadable expansion pack The Last of Us : Left Behind , Ellie and Riley dance to the Etta James cover of the song " I Got You Babe " . In addition , " String Quartet No. 3 in E @-@ Flat Minor , Op. 30 " by Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and " String Quartet No. 4 in E @-@ Minor ( <unk> ) " by Antonín Dvořák are also present in Left Behind . 
 = = Albums = = 
 = = = The Last of Us = = = 
 The soundtrack for The Last of Us comprises songs from the game , composed and produced by Gustavo Santaolalla . The soundtrack spans thirty tracks , covering a duration of 56 minutes . Sony Computer Entertainment first published the album digitally via iTunes on June 7 , 2013 , and physically on June 13 , 2013 . The soundtrack was also included as pre @-@ order downloadable content in the Sights and Sounds Pack . 
 The orchestral score , performed by the Nashville Scoring Orchestra , was recorded at Ocean Way Studios in Nashville , while the soundtrack 's drums and percussion , performed by Santaolalla , M.B. Gordy and Jonathan Mayer , was recorded at EastWest Studios in Hollywood . All recording was done by Mark Senasac and Aníbal Kerpel . The soundtrack was mastered by Tom Baker at Precision Mastering in Los Angeles . 
 In the context of the game , the soundtrack was well received . Andy Kelly of Computer and Video Games felt that the score is " sparse and delicate " ; Eurogamer 's Oli Welsh echoed these statements , adding that the music compliments the game 's environments . Jim Sterling of Destructoid also praised the music 's ability to compliment gameplay . Matt Helgeson of Game Informer praised Santaolalla 's work , calling it " understated and haunting " . Chris Kerr of Side One felt that the soundtrack was " the perfect companion " to the game , stating that it is " poignant , moving , and overflowing with desolate hope " . Similarly , Keri <unk> of Game Revolution felt that the album can be " easily enjoy [ ed ] outside of the game " , praising its unusual tracks and sound . GameSpot 's Tom Mc Shea named the music as one of the game 's standout features , calling it " exceptional " and praising its addition during emotional scenes . Thom Jurek of AllMusic praised the album 's variety , stating that Santaolalla manages to " draw in and keep the attention of the listener . " 
 All songs written and composed by Gustavo Santaolalla . 
 = = = The Last of Us Volume 2 = = = 
 The Last of Us Volume 2 , the soundtrack for the downloadable content The Last of Us : Left Behind , features compositions from the game , composed and produced by Gustavo Santaolalla . It also features works from Andrew Buresh , Anthony Caruso , and Jonathan Mayer , as well as some additional tracks from the main game . The soundtrack spans 25 tracks , covering a duration of 58 minutes . Sony Computer Entertainment first published the album on iTunes and Amazon Music on February 7 , 2014 , one week prior to the release of Left Behind . 
 The recording and mastering of the soundtrack took place in the same locations as the first album . The orchestral score , performed by the Nashville Scoring Orchestra , was recorded at Ocean Way Studios in Nashville , while the soundtrack 's drums and percussion , performed by M.B. Gordy , Santaolalla and Mayer , was recorded at EastWest Studios in Hollywood . All recording and mixing was completed by Aníbal Kerpel , with additional mixing by Mark Senasac , Joel <unk> , Mayer and Caruso . The soundtrack was mastered by Marc Senasac at PlayStation Recording Studios . 
 In the context of the game , the soundtrack was generally well received . Mike <unk> of Game Informer felt that the soundtrack improves the game . Adnan Riaz of Nouse echoed similar remarks , stating that the soundtrack accompanies some of the game 's " crucial moments " , and that it " builds the atmosphere for the exchanges " between the characters . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Last of Us won Excellence in Musical Score at the 2014 SXSW Gaming Awards , and the soundtrack received nominations at the 10th British Academy Video Games Awards and Spike VGX 2013 , and from Hardcore Gamer , IGN and GameTrailers . The game 's main theme was performed live at the 2012 Spike Video Game Awards in Culver City , California on December 7 , 2012 . Music from The Last of Us was also performed live at The Last of Us : One Night Live in Santa Monica , California on July 28 , 2014 . The event featured scenes from the game performed live by the actors , accompanied by the game 's score , performed by Santaolalla and his band . The popularity of the game has led to numerous cover versions of the music being released by various artists , such as violinist Taylor Davis , guitarist Igor <unk> and musician Ben " Squid Physics " Morfitt . 
 = Murrays ' Mills = 
 Murrays ' Mills is a complex of former cotton mills on land between Jersey Street and the Rochdale Canal in the district of Ancoats , Manchester , England . The mills were built for brothers Adam and George Murray . 
 The first mill on the site , Old Mill , was begun in 1797 , and is the world 's oldest surviving urban steam @-@ powered cotton spinning factory . After Old Mill opened , the company continued to expand and prosper , and by 1806 the complex was the largest in the world , employing about 1 @,@ 000 people at its peak : Decker Mill was opened in 1802 , New Mill in 1804 , Little Mill in 1822 , and Doubling and Fireproof Mill in 1842 . The main complex formed a quadrangle surrounding a private canal basin linked under the road to the Rochdale Canal , which opened in 1804 . The canal basin was used to deliver raw cotton and coal and to transport spun cotton away from the complex . 
 In the 1898 , A & G Murray became part of the Fine Cotton Spinners ' and Doublers ' Association Limited ( FCSDA ) . The mill complex began to decline in the early 20th century as the canal basin was filled in and Little Mill burnt down . The mill was replaced with the earliest mill in Greater Manchester that was built to use mains electricity . The mill complex continued producing cotton until the 1950s . The mills were later leased out to other companies and in some cases allowed to fall into disrepair . Between 2000 and 2003 , Urban Splash redeveloped Fireproof and Doubling Mill into offices , winning a RIBA Award . The rest of the complex underwent a £ 17M regeneration between 2004 and 2006 and are proposed to be used as flats and a hotel . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation and establishment = = = 
 After migrating from Scotland in the 1780s , the Murrays established themselves as manufacturers of textile machinery before moving into spinning fine yarn . In the late 18th and early 19th centuries the main market for Murrays ' fine spun yarn was the muslin @-@ weaving industry in Scotland ; along with McConnel & Kennedy , A & G Murray dominated the Scottish market . In 1790 , Adam Murray leased land in Ancoats ; in partnership with his brother George , began construction of his first mill – which was complete by about 1798 . The mill was probably designed to house equipment produced by the Murray brothers themselves . First known as Union Mill , from its position on Union Street , the Old Mill was a purpose @-@ built steam @-@ powered spinning mill . Construction took approximately a year and millwright Thomas Lowe – who had worked on Richard Arkwright 's first two factories – planned the building . It is eight storeys high and probably the first cotton @-@ spinning factory to have been built that high . The first phase of the mill , an area of 105 feet ( 32 m ) by 42 feet ( 13 m ) , was built of 400 @,@ 000 locally made bricks . The machinery was powered by a 12 horse power ( hp ) , £ 620 Boulton and Watt steam engine . 
 Construction of the Murrays ' second mill , Decker Mill , had begun by 1801 to the east of Old Mill . It was the same height as Old Mill and doubled the size of the complex . Decker Mill was completed in time to exploit the economic boom in the cotton trade that followed the brief peace in the war with France from 1802 – 1803 . During its construction , the steam engine was replaced a more powerful 40 hp Boulton and Watt engine . 
 After the completion of the Ancoats section of the Rochdale Canal in 1804 , raw materials no longer had to be moved by cart . Coal and cotton could be moved directly into the complex and there was a readily available supply of water for the steam engines from the private basin on the canal . The entrance tunnel to the basin was set 90 ° to the canal , with a short arm on the opposite side ; and as the canal is only 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) wide , it posed navigation problems for canal boats , which could be 70 feet ( 21 m ) in length . It is possible that cargo was transferred to smaller vessels for the journey between the canal and the complex basin . 
 Construction of New Mill was probably completed in 1804 . It measured 193 feet ( 59 m ) by 46 feet ( 14 m ) and as with the older mills , it was eight storeys high . It was fitted with a 45 hp steam engines from Boulton and Watt . All three mills were steam @-@ power cotton @-@ spinning factories . 
 The complex was further extended with the addition of two four @-@ storey blocks on Murray Street and Bengal Street by 1806 . These were mainly used as warehouses and offices . An entrance archway in the Murray Street block provided the only access to a central courtyard where the mills had their entrances . This meant that access to all parts of the site could be controlled . 
 By 1806 , the Murrays ' Mills was the largest mill complex in Manchester and the world . With 84 @,@ 000 mule spindles the complex was huge compared to others at the time , most of which had less than 10 @,@ 000 spindles . The status of the complex was reflected in the amount of ornamentation on the Murray Street and Bengal Street blocks compared to other mills . The Murray Street block had a symmetrical arrangement of arched doorways and windows . This pattern was in turn mirrored on the Bengal Street block , which had an arrangement of false doorways . 
 A & G Murray prospered during the early 19th century , and in 1809 the firm was valued at £ 20 @,@ 456 : 13 % more than their nearest rival , McConnel & Kennedy , and more than double the firm in third place . The company was " one of the largest cotton @-@ spinning firms in Manchester , and probably the country " . By 1815 , it employed 1 @,@ 215 people . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 During the early to mid @-@ 19th century there were several periods of depression and prosperity in the cotton trade . In this period , A & G Murray would have been less affected by these changes due to the size of the firm . In 1817 , engineers William Fairbairn and his partner James Lillie updated the complex . The contract , Fairbairn 's first as a millwright , involved the replacement of line shafting in the complex , with wrought iron line @-@ shafting designed to work at higher speeds . Adam Murray died in 1818 and his brother George continued to run the firm . By 1818 , the firm had nearly tripled in value since 1809 to £ 59 @,@ 000 . 
 Additionally , the firm also expanded beyond Bengal Street further along the strip of land between Jersey Street and the Rochdale Canal . Little Mill was built on the corner of Jersey Street and Bengal Street around 1822 . It was originally six storeys high , but an additional three storeys were added at an unknown later date . The building covered 644 square metres ( 6 @,@ 930 sq ft ) and just over half of this area would have been occupied by a gasometer house which would have supplied the complex with gas used for lighting . The mill was linked to New Mill via a tunnel which may have carried the gas supply . Engineer Joshua Field visited the mill in 1821 and commented " they spin the finest thread " . He also noted that the furnace which provided steam to drive the engines had been fitted with a " smoke burner " to " lessen the consumption of fuel " , also having the effect of reducing the amount of smoke produced . 
 Despite the continued expansion , by 1824 competitors McConnel and Kennedy had overtaken the Murrays as Manchester 's biggest cotton spinners . In 1833 A & G Murray were employing only 841 people , a reduction in workforce George Murray attributed to " recent improvement in the firm 's machinery " . 
 In 1842 , Doubling Mill and Fireproof Mill were built on the corner of Redhill Street and Bengal Street . Doubling Mill is five storeys high with an engine house designed to contain a 40 hp beam engine . Doubling Mill was used for doubling – the process of combining two or more lengths of yarn into a single thread – cotton produced in the company 's earlier mills , giving the mill its name . Fireproof Mill , again as its name suggests , was designed to be fireproof by using cast @-@ iron beams and columns rather than timber ; it was the first mill in the mill complex to have been built to resist fire . The mill is four storeys high and may have been used as a warehouse . The two new mills were also linked to the original complex by tunnels under Bengal Street . The firm " doubled more or less " in size during the early to mid nineteenth century and expanded into the fine yarn markets around Nottingham , the growth of the firm led to the creation of the Doubling and Fireproof Mills . 
 In December 1852 , the mill complex was valued at £ 75 @,@ 000 ; when George Murray died in 1855 , two of his three sons – James and Benjamin – inherited the complex . By 1881 , A & G Murray had become registered as a limited liability company and the running of it was mostly in the hands of manager Herbert Dixon , who had joined the company in 1876 , as the Murray family played less of a role . Under Dixon the company modernised and used new technology and was the reason for the firm 's continued success . The use of new , more efficient technologies resulted in the further reduction of the workforce so that by 1897 , A & G Murray only employed 500 people . In 1887 , Fireproof Mill and Doubling Mill were leased by A & G Murray Ltd to C E Bennet . 
 In September 1898 , A & G Murray was " voluntarily wound up and conveyed to the Fine Cotton Spinners ' and Doublers ' Association Limited ( FCSDA ) " . The association had been an idea on the part of Dixon and Scott <unk> to form an association of cotton spinners . Thirty @-@ one other cotton spinners also joined the association . The association had the advantage of great size in comparison to the competition , and had the necessary clout to secure raw materials . With Dixon as its Managing Director until 1917 , by the 1920s , the FCSDA was the largest and most successful cotton @-@ spinning association in the world with over 60 mills and 30 @,@ 000 employees . 
 On 28 January 1908 , a fire broke out in Little Mill , caused by some machinery . The fire lasted for about 12 hours and caused an estimated £ 20 @,@ 000 damage and resulted in 200 employees at the mill losing their jobs . Whilst fighting the fire a fireman was killed when a fire @-@ tender blew over in high winds . The building was replaced by a new building , New Little Mill , five storeys high , four shorter than its predecessor but occupying a larger area of ground . The new mill had concrete floors and was designed to use mains electricity . The building is the earliest mill in Greater Manchester that was built to use mains electricity . 
 = = = Decline and later use = = = 
 An 1891 Ordnance Survey map shows that the arm on the Rochdale Canal had been filled in and the complex 's canal basin had been retitled as a reservoir , suggesting that the canal had ceased to be used as a way of transporting goods to and from the complex . By 1902 , the canal basin had been filled in , however exactly when it was filled in is unknown . 
 Between 1902 and 1903 , Old and Decker Mills were reduced in height by 1 storey to 7 storeys and New Mill was reduced in height by 2 storeys to 6 storeys . The exact reason for this reduction is unknown , however , it is speculated that the structure of the buildings was struggling to cope with the weight of increasingly heavy machinery . This theory is given added weight by the fact that at around the same time the timber beams used to support ceilings were replaced with steel beams to strengthen the building . In 1930 the Bengal Street block was also reduced in height by 2 storeys and buttresses were constructed against the south wall of Decker Mill . 
 By the 1940s Fireproof Mill and Doubling Mill were occupied by a bedding manufacturer . In 1948 , the break @-@ up of the main site began with Old Mill and Decker Mill being sold , with the Murray Street block following in 1950 , and the Bengal Street block in 1960 . Old and Decker Mill were used as a warehouse after 1954 and later used by several clothing manufacturers . 
 Although some work was done to strengthen the structure in the 1960s , the complex was allowed to fall into disrepair . Also during the 1960s , some sections of the complex began to be left unoccupied and others burned down including an engine block . During this period , parts of the complex were used for light industrial use before they too fell into disuse . In the 1990s , the buildings fell victim to vandalism and arson that threatened to destroy what remained of the site . 
 = = Redevelopment = = 
 In 2000 , Total Architecture appointed Urban Splash to convert Fireproof and Doubling Mill into office space . On completion in 2003 , the conversion received a RIBA Award . 
 The North West Development Agency used a compulsory purchase order to take control of the main site in 2003 . This allowed the Heritage Lottery Fund to give a £ <unk> grant towards the restoration of the complex . Together with an additional grant from the North West Development Agency , a £ 10M regeneration project took place between 2004 and 2006 . The project included repair and strengthening of the structure , the restoration of the canal basin , a new roof and windows , and the reinstatement of two missing floors from the Murray Street block . 
 On completion of the repairs , there have been further proposals to bring the complex back into use by converting it into flats and a hotel . The conversion , including the replacement of the demolished Bengal Street block , was expected to start in 2007 or 2008 and take three years . However , in July 2008 it emerged that due to the current state of the housing market , developer <unk> wanted to amend planning consent for the development , replacing plans for flats in Old and Decker Mills with office space . 
 = = Working conditions = = 
 Like many factories of the nineteenth century , the complex was not without criticism for its working conditions . Although George Murray would not reveal working hours in the complex , it is likely that up until 1825 the workers had a similar work requirement as the 72 @-@ hour week demanded of workers at the neighbouring McConnel Kennedy complex . After 1825 , the Cotton Mills Regulation Act reduced this to 69 hours – 12 hours per day on Monday to Friday and 9 hours on a Saturday . These hours were worked by all but the youngest employees . 
 The workers were allowed three breaks per day . In order to stop employees wandering off and taking breaks that they were not entitled to , tunnels were built under the road between the main complex and the later mills on the other side of Bengal Street . 
 The worst conditions in the mill were experienced by those at the bottom end of the pay @-@ scale . The first stage of unpacking the raw cotton and cleaning out impurities , which was carried out by unskilled workers , produced large amounts of dust that was both a health hazard and serious fire risk . A visitor to the complex in 1832 described the dust as " almost suffocating " . 
 On the spinning floors , the spinning process required a warm humid environment . George Murray stated that they tried to keep temperatures at around 24 ° C ( 75 ° F ) . Spinners were regarded as craftsmen , and they were paid by the amount they produced . They were also left to recruit , train and pay their own assistants . These assistants were often children , and consisted of " <unk> " who rejoined broken threads and mule scavengers who cleaned the machinery . Child labour was generally considered by mill managers to be an important way of securing a skilled adult work force . 
 Compared to other trades , wages in cotton mills were relatively high . In 1833 , the average earnings of an employee at the complex was 12 shillings ( 60p ) per week , which compared favourably with other mills . However , unlike some other mill owners the Murrays did not give employees credit to buy goods from company @-@ owned stores , or provide housing for employees beyond key workers . 
 Despite all this , evidence suggests that conditions were better than in some other mills . The complex had opening windows , and an extra room per floor for workers to wash . The third break of the day , in the afternoon , was also a luxury that many workers in other mills did not receive . Furthermore , the Murrays also claimed that , unlike many other mill owners , they did not use pauper children from workhouses , or knowingly employ children under the age of nine , although George Murray conceded that some parents did employ their own children below that age . 
 = = Current buildings = = 
 = 1928 Haiti hurricane = 
 The 1928 Haiti hurricane was considered the worst tropical cyclone in Haiti since the 1886 Indianola hurricane . The second tropical cyclone and second hurricane of the season , the storm developed from a tropical wave near Tobago on August 7 . Steadily intensifying as it moved northwestward , the system passed through the southern Windward Islands . Upon entering the Caribbean Sea early on August 8 , the tropical depression strengthened into a tropical storm . On August 9 , the storm strengthened to the equivalent of a Category 1 hurricane . The next day , the hurricane peaked with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . After striking the Tiburon Peninsula of Haiti , the cyclone began weakening and fell to tropical storm intensity on August 12 . By midday on the following day , the storm made landfall near Cienfuegos , Cuba . Upon emerging into the Straits of Florida , the storm began to re @-@ strengthen . Early on August 13 , it struck Big Pine Key , Florida , as a strong tropical storm . Weakening slowly while moving north @-@ northwestward , the system made another landfall near St. George Island . After moving inland , the tropical storm slowly deteriorated and dissipated over West Virginia on August 17 . 
 In Haiti , the storm completely wiped out live stock and many crops , particularly coffee , cocoa , and sugar . Several villages were also destroyed , rendering approximately 10 @,@ 000 people homeless . Damage reached $ 1 million and there were at least 200 deaths . The only impact in Cuba was downed banana trees . In Florida , the storm left minor wind damage along the coast . A Seaboard Air Line Railroad station was destroyed in Boca Grande , while signs , trees , and telephone poles were knocked down in Sarasota . Several streets in St. Petersburg were closed due to flooding or debris . Between Cedar Key and the Florida Panhandle , several vessels capsized . Water washed up along the side of roads and in wooded areas . The storm contributed to flooding onset by the previous hurricane , with rainfall peaking at 13 @.@ 5 in ( 340 mm ) in Caesars Head , South Carolina . The worst impact from flooding occurred in North Carolina , where several houses were destroyed . Six people were killed in the state , of which four due to flooding . Property damage in the state totaled over $ 1 million . Overall , the storm caused at least $ 2 million in damage and 210 fatalities . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A westward @-@ moving tropical wave developed into a tropical depression while situated near Tobago on August 7 . Initially , the storm was considered a " disturbance of slight to moderate intensity " . Moving northwestward , the system passed through the Windward Islands just south of Carriacou and Petite Martinique . Upon entering the Caribbean Sea early on August 8 , a ship reported winds of 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) . As a result , HURDAT indicts that the depression became a tropical storm at 00 : 00 UTC . On August 9 , the storm strengthened into a Category 1 hurricane on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale , while located about 155 mi ( 250 km ) south of San Pedro de Macorís , Dominican Republic . At 12 : 00 UTC on August 10 , the cyclone attained its peak intensity as strong Category 1 hurricane with maximum sustained winds with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 998 mbar ( 29 @.@ 5 inHg ) . Early on August 9 , the storm made landfall in the Tiburon Peninsula of Haiti , based on " belated reports [ indicating ] that a very small but destructive disturbance passed over extreme southwest Haiti " . The quickly re @-@ emerged into the Caribbean Sea later that day . 
 A small cyclone , the hurricane passed between Cuba and Jamaica and weakened to a tropical storm early on August 12 . By midday , the storm made landfall near Cienfuegos , Cuba , with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . Several telegraphic reports indicated that " the center [ of the storm ] was not definitely traceable for the next 24 to 36 hours " , but other reports noted that the center passed over then @-@ Oriente Province . Hours later , the system reached the Straits of Florida and immediately began to re @-@ intensify . Early on August 13 , it struck Big Pine Key , Florida , as a strong tropical storm with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Thereafter , the storm moved north @-@ northwestward over the Gulf of Mexico . At 14 : 00 UTC on August 14 , it made landfall near St. George Island , Florida , with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . After moving inland , the tropical storm slowly deteriorated , falling to tropical depression intensity over east @-@ central Alabama on August 15 . Thereafter , the depression moved north @-@ northeastward and dissipated over West Virginia on August 17 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Greater Antilles = = = 
 As the storm approached Hispaniola , warnings were sent to vessels offshore Haiti and Jamaica . In Haiti , the storm brought torrential rainfall for over 20 hours . Many villages were completely destroyed , leaving over 10 @,@ 000 people homeless . The city of Saint @-@ Louis @-@ du @-@ Sud was almost completely wiped out , with only two buildings retaining their roofs . Additionally , approximately 80 % of buildings in Grand @-@ <unk> and Petit <unk> were flattened . Overall , most municipalities were flooded with 8 to 20 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 to 6 @.@ 1 m ) of water . At least 200 deaths were recorded , including 26 in Miragoâne and 12 at a single dwellings in Belle @-@ Riviere . In the most devastated areas , flooding also killed all farm animals and entire coffee , cocoa , and sugar crops were wiped out . An estimated three to six months was required to regrow the lost agriculture . Along the coast , rough seas capsized or washed ashore many small crafts . The storm was described as the worst in Haiti since the 1886 Indianola hurricane . The storm destroyed most of the unpaved , vehicular trails in its path . Overall , the damage to roadways , communications , and public services was estimated at $ 1 million . 
 After the storm , approximately 100 @,@ 000 people were facing starvation . Then @-@ Haitian president Louis <unk> reported that the government had inefficient resources for recovery and asked citizens to assist with repairing infrastructure and providing food and shelter to others . The Government of Haiti , in turn , appropriated $ 200 @,@ 000 for relief . Eleven storages with relief supplies were established throughout the country . The approximately 10 @,@ 000 people left homeless were temporarily houses in larger , undamaged buildings . Within a few months after the storm , 299 homes were rebuilt or repair , costing almost $ 37 @,@ 000 . The vehicular paths destroyed by the hurricane were eventually replaced by 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) -wide paved gravel roads . In September , the American Red Cross donated $ 10 @,@ 000 to the Haitian Red Cross . 
 In Cuba , the storm brought gusty winds and excessive rainfall , but impact was primarily limited to fallen banana trees in an area then known as Oriente Province . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Hurricane warnings were hoisted in portions of the Florida Keys early on August 13 . However , the highest observed wind speed was only 36 mph ( 58 km / h ) . Between Cedar Key and the Florida Panhandle , some residents took refuge at churches and schools . In the mainland of Florida , winds resulted in generally minor damage along the west coast . In Boca Grande , a Seaboard Air Line Railroad station was destroyed . Plate glass was damaged and signs , trees , and telephone poles were knocked down in Sarasota . Rough seas began smashing a revenue cutter service ship docked at the Coast Guard station in St. Petersburg against the wharves ; bumpers were placed between the ship and pilings to further damage . Several streets were closed due to flooding or debris . One street closed after roof tiles started falling from a theater . At one intersection , several cars were stranded due to 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) of water covering the road . Although some coastal areas experienced rough seas , others reported their lowest tides in years , especially Pass @-@ a @-@ Grille and Tampa , with almost all of the water blown out of Boca Ciega Bay , which is located adjacent to the former . Several vessels , mostly small fishing crafts , capsized . Water washed up along the side of roads and in wooded areas , while many trees were toppled . 
 The storm also contributed to ongoing flooding in the Southeastern United States onset by the previous hurricane . In Georgia , hydroelectric dams in Quitman were overtopped by creeks and rivers . One highway was completely submerged and four bridges were swept away . A railroad passenger train was abandoned due to water rising above the tracks . The Ocmulgee River at Macon crested at 20 @.@ 9 ft ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) . Additionally , the Withlacoochee River was expect to reach its highest level in years . Overall , crops , highways , and railroads across the southern portion of the state were severely damaged . Milledgeville was left without water due to flooding . The Oconee River was expected to reach 34 ft ( 10 m ) in height at the city 's river gauge . A bridge across the Oconee was swept away as was approximately 1 @,@ 500 ft ( 460 m ) of railroad tracks . About 200 families in Augusta evacuated due to the rising Savannah River . In South Carolina , rainfall peaked at 13 @.@ 5 in ( 340 mm ) in Caesars Head , which is the highest precipitation total associated with the storm . The city of Spartanburg prepared for its worst flood since 1916 . Throughout Upstate South Carolina , highways , railroads , and crops were flooded . In Bath , a " freakish " tornado destroyed at least 50 homes and injured one person . Additionally , a wind storm in Newberry County severely damaged " scores " of dwellings . Two deaths occurred in South Carolina . 
 In North Carolina , rainfall caused the Catawba , French Broad , Swannanoa , and Yadkin rivers to overflow their banks . Many nearby homes and structures were swept away . Families along the South <unk> River near Tryon were evacuated . Additionally , two shelters were set up in Asheville , one at a Salvation Army post and another at the municipal auditorium , where hundreds of cots were set @-@ up . A mudslide near Asheville moved across a railroad track , blocking the route to locomotive traffic . Several feet of water covered highways near Marshall , leaving many roads impassable . Extensive crop losses also occurred in western North Carolina , with agricultural losses reaching $ 250 @,@ 000 in Burke County alone . Six people were killed in the state , of which four due to flooding and two others from a tornado in Ashley Heights . Property damage totaled over $ 1 million . Rainfall from both the previous hurricane and this storm brought flooding to Virginia . Major flooding was reported along the Roanoke River from <unk> to Roanoke . At the former , the river crested at 14 ft ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) above flood stage . In <unk> , crops were ruined and 11 buildings were flooded . Route 17 north of Fincastle was inundated , blocking traffic between Clifton Forge and Covington . Two deaths occurred in Virginia , one from drowning and another from fright while crossing the Roanoke River . 
 = Behind These Hazel Eyes = 
 " Behind These Hazel Eyes " is a song recorded by American singer Kelly Clarkson for her second studio album , Breakaway ( 2004 ) . It was written by Clarkson with the song 's producers Max Martin and Dr. Luke . The song was released on April 12 , 2005 as the second single from the album . Clarkson considered " Behind These Hazel Eyes " as one of her favorite songs and she once intended to name Breakaway after the song . " Behind These Hazel Eyes " is an uptempo pop rock song that incorporates crunchy guitars which are pulsated with driving beats and anthemic choruses ; it narrates Clarkson 's broken relationship with her ex @-@ boyfriend . 
 " Behind These Hazel Eyes " peaked at number six on the Billboard Hot 100 and stayed inside the top ten in the chart for fifteen weeks . It also became Clarkson 's first song to top the Adult Pop Songs chart . It was certified platinum from Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for selling over one million digital downloads . Elsewhere , the song charted in the top ten in Australia , Austria , Ireland , Netherlands , New Zealand and the United Kingdom . 
 The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Joseph Kahn and produced by <unk> <unk> @-@ Barrett . The concept of the video was conceived by Clarkson and depicts her as a bride who experiences some dream @-@ like hints that her husband @-@ to @-@ be is having an affair with a brunette ceremony attendee . The music video premiered online at MTV and it also received heavy rotation on Total Request Live . The song was performed live by Clarkson at numerous venues , including the Breakaway World Tour ( 2005 ) and the All I Ever Wanted Tour ( 2009 ) . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 In 2004 , Clarkson flew to Sweden to collaborate with Max Martin and Lukasz " Dr. Luke " Gottwald for her album , Breakaway . Clarkson and Martin were interested in turning in a more rock direction , as opposed to the " slick pop " with which they were identified . The songs " Since U Been Gone " as well as " Behind These Hazel Eyes " were the products of their collaboration . According to Dr. Luke , " Behind These Hazel Eyes " was sent to Clarkson without any lyrics as part of an olive branch to the singer . He explained , 
 We had just done with " Since U Been Gone , " which everyone was happy with . We sent a rough version of " Behind These Hazel Eyes , " without any lyrics , to Kelly and Clive Davis . It was in part an olive branch to Kelly , because there was miscommunication on " Since U Been Gone , " where Kelly had written some lyrics and Max and I didn 't know about it and we had finished the song . So we wanted to write " Behind " with her from the beginning , but we were in different places . She had just won " American Idol " and was on tour , so she 'd e @-@ mail me lyrics , and I 'd e @-@ mail her my thoughts . 
 In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Clarkson explains that " Behind These Hazel Eyes " is " about the dipstick who completely screwed up and now is unhappy and you 're happy . " She also considered the song as one of her favorites that she once intended to name Breakaway after the song . Critics speculated that the song reflects Clarkson 's break @-@ up with David Hodges , the ex @-@ member of Evanescence . According to MTV , the song was originally written prior to the break @-@ up . Nonetheless , Clarkson decided to tweak the song lyrics after breaking up with Hodges to express her emotional pain . Clarkson also said that the song almost did not make it into the album . She explained , " It had different lyrics in the beginning [ ... ] I ended up calling Luke [ Lukasz Gottwald ] , the writer , and we did a totally different song to it . It 's now my favorite song on the record . Crappy relationships [ make for ] a good song . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Behind These Hazel Eyes " was written by Clarkson , Max Martin , and Dr. Luke and was produced by the latter two . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Publishing , it is set in common time and has a moderate tempo of 90 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of F sharp minor with Clarkson 's vocal range spanning over two octaves from F # 3 to F # 5 . The bridge was the only part of the song that was written by Dr. Luke and Martin together with Clarkson face to face . The song begins with Clarkson wailing " oh oh oh " over a restless percussion . In the first verse , the music becomes quiet to focus on Clarkson 's vocal as she wails " Seems like just yesterday / You were a part of me / I used to stand so tall / I used to be so strong / Your arms around me tight / Everything it felt so right / Unbreakable like nothing could go wrong . " During the chorus , the sound of electronic guitar is dominant as she vocalizes " Here I am / Once again / I ’ m torn into pieces / Can ’ t deny it / Can ’ t pretend / Just thought you were the one / Broken up deep inside / But you won ’ t get to see the tears I cry / Behind these hazel eyes . " Gil Kaufman of MTV noticed that the song " soared on crunchy guitars , driving beats and anthemic , agitated choruses . " 
 Lyrically , the song narrates the story of a failed relationship which initially started off well . Clarkson regrets having allowed herself to be vulnerable to her ex @-@ boyfriend and she is determined that despite the pain that she feels , he will not get the satisfaction of seeing her cry . Michael Paoletta of Billboard praised Clarkson 's vocal , writing " Clarkson simply delivers a loose , tour @-@ de @-@ force vocal that simmers alongside a steroid @-@ charged musical backdrop that is fun , fast and furious . " Scott Juba of The Trade praised the production of the song , writing " The song ’ s strong hook pulls listeners in and involves them in the lyrics without ever becoming gimmicky or manipulative . " He also complimented Clarkson 's vocal which " oscillates between pain and defiance with near pinpoint accuracy . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Elizabeth Scott of Sky Living wrote , " while Clarkson is doing well musically , her love life still hasn 't picked up and she is heartbroken once again . I 'm sure the thought of another top ten hit might cheer her up ! " Scott Juba of The Trades considered " Behind These Hazel Eyes " as the highlight of the album , writing " Now that [ Clarkson is ] a few years older than she was when she recorded her first album , she brings more authenticity to relationship songs . " Evan Sawdey of PopMatters compared " Don 't Let Me Stop You " ( 2009 ) with " Behind These Hazel Eyes " saying that the former " may sound like another rewrite of an older Clarkson hit ( in this case , " Behind These Hazel Eyes " ) , but the observational lyrics about a questionable relationship are what ultimately makes the whole thing click . " Charles Merwin of Stylus Magazine felt that the song should sell records more because " the entire musical backing drops out to let Clarkson ’ s voice through to live or die on its own . " Pam Avoledo of Blogcritics believed that " Behind These Hazel Eyes " was superior to the writing of " Since U Been Gone " , commenting that " It 's punchier , well @-@ written and gives Clarkson a chance to show off her vocal skills without the trendy haughtiness . " 
 Joe Cross of Cox Communications thought that " Behind These Hazel Eyes " was a decent follow @-@ up to " Since U Been Gone " , saying " It 's no " Since U Been Gone " which is just a pop @-@ rock juggernaut , but as follow @-@ ups go , it 's not too shabby . Clarkson 's down @-@ home everything ( well , mostly her looks ) sells these little heartbreak haikus exceptionally well . " He also listed " Behind These Hazel Eyes " as one of the 40 songs that defined the summer of 2005 . Maria DiLorenzo of Yahoo ! ranked " Behind These Hazel Eyes " at number four in her list of " Top Ten Kelly Clarkson Song of the Decade " , writing " beautiful crooning and yes once again an elegant old world romantic video to go along with it . You have no choice but to be enamored by the combination . " Chris Kal of <unk> ranked " Behind These Hazel Eyes " at number four in his list of " Top 10 Summer Songs From 2005 " . Sam <unk> of PopCrush described the song as " a surefire fan favorite " and ranked it at number nine in his list of " Top 10 Kelly Clarkson songs " . Bill Lamb of About.com put the song at number 62 on his list of " Top 100 Pop Songs of 2005 " . At the 24th ASCAP Pop Music Awards , the song was honored with the Most Performed Songs award . On January 2010 , " Behind These Hazel Eyes " was the fifth most played song of the last decade by American Idol performers . The song was nominated in the category for Song of the Year : Mainstream Hit Radio in the 2005 Radio Music Awards . Robert Copsey of Digital Spy considered " Behind These Hazel Eyes " as Clarkson 's second best single after " Since U Been Gone " , writing " It proved a slow burner at the time of release , but this track 's greatness continues to be realised over time . " On May 12 , 2015 , Billboard ranked the song at number four on its list of Top 100 ' American Idol ' Hits of All Time . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Behind These Hazel Eyes " debuted at number eighty @-@ seven on the Billboard Hot 100 on the week ending , April 23 , 2005 . The song peaked at number six on the week ending June 11 , 2005 . It stayed inside the top ten in Billboard Hot 100 for fifteen weeks . On the week ending August 27 , 2005 , the song topped the Adult Top 40 and stayed in the position for five consecutive weeks . On the Billboard 's Radio Songs , the song peaked at number four on August 6 , 2005 . The song also appeared on the US Pop Songs at number thirty on the week ending April 30 , 2005 , and peaked at number two on the week ending July 9 , 2005 . It spent seven consecutive weeks at number two and was held off the top spot by Mariah Carey 's " We Belong Together " . It became the sixteenth ranked single of the 2000s decade on the Pop Songs chart complied by Billboard . On January 31 , 2008 , " Behind These Hazel Eyes " was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . The song has sold 1 @,@ 508 @,@ 000 digital copies in the United States as of March 2013 . 
 Internationally , " Behind These Hazel Eyes " was a commercial success . In Australia , the song debuted and peaked at number six on the week ending July 3 , 2005 . In New Zealand , the song entered New Zealand Singles Chart and peaked at number seven on the week ending July 4 , 2005 as the highest debut of the week . In the United Kingdom , the song also debuted and peaked at number nine on the week ending October 1 , 2005 . In Ireland , the song debuted at number nine on the week ending September 22 , 2005 , and peaked at number four on the week ending November 3 , 2005 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and release = = = 
 The music video was directed by Joseph Kahn and was produced by <unk> <unk> @-@ Barrett . It was shot for two days in April 2005 in Toronto at a Church and a sound stage while Clarkson was on tour . According to Kahn , Clarkson was sick during the production and could not speak . During Clarkson 's wardrobe fitting , they communicated together using notes written by her . Though she is seen speaking and is interviewed in the behind the scenes footage . Access Hollywood reported that a single sprinkler was used to produce rain in the music video . The concept of the music video was conceived by Clarkson . She explained , " The whole thing is a metaphor about a broken fairy tale [ ... ] You think everything is going well , and then reality kicks your butt . It 's kind of a sad video , but it 's going to be my best one . It 's real , and that 's why people like me . " Clarkson also added that after the production of the music video was completed , she had bruises and a green @-@ and @-@ yellow splotch on her left biceps . The music video premiered online on May 9 , 2005 , on MTV . On May 16 , 2005 , it premiered on Total Request Live where it debuted at number five on the chart the following day . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The music video begins with Clarkson standing in a room wearing a white wedding dress . Holding a bouquet of red rose , she is surrounded by her bridesmaids as they prepare for her wedding . She sits down on a sofa and sees a wedding photo of her fiancé with another woman as a storm begins to form outside . The bridesmaids try to close the windows but fail so they run out of the room leaving Clarkson alone , who is seen dropping the bouquet of rose as well as the wedding photo from her hands onto the floor . The next scene shows Clarkson walking down the aisle in a church wearing a black dress . She sees a bride standing at the altar with her fiancé , getting married . When she draws the veil of the bride , she realizes that the bride is the woman from the photo . Clarkson , who is now wearing a white wedding dress , runs out of the church and into a dark swamp . A montage of Clarkson singing with her band in a dark swamp is shown alternately with scenes of Clarkson running in the forest and laying on the ground . Clarkson is also seen standing inside an abandoned house , wearing a voluminous black dress . As the rain starts to fall , Clarkson finally collapsed , kneeling on the ground while looking at and being comforted by her other self who is singing with the band . The scene shifts to a present day , where Clarkson is standing at the altar , exchanging vows with her fiancé . Before he puts the ring on her finger , she looks at the guests and notices that the woman from the photo is among the audience . She sees her fiancé exchanging a smile with the woman as the woman blows him a kiss . Clarkson then reaches for the ring and throws it at her fiancé , before running away from the altar . She throws her wedding bouquet into the lap of the woman and shoves her way past the wedding guests who are trying to stop her from leaving . The video ends with Clarkson stepping out the doors into the bright sunlight . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 James Dinh of MTV Newsroom listed " Behind These Hazel Eyes " as one of the music videos with " a bad case of the runaway bride syndrome , " writing , " Throughout the clip , Clarkson finds herself running through a swampy mud land until she snaps out of her visions , refuses to proceed with the wedding and makes a shocking escape out of the church . " Andrea Holmes of AOL ranked " Behind These Hazel Eyes " at number five in her list of " Top Wedding Music Videos : 15 Clips for the Big ' I Do ' . " She commented , " The perfect illustration of our point about wedding videos , ' Behind These Hazel Eyes ' takes an atypical approach to marriage [ ... ] Throughout the video the weather is dark and rainy , matching the story line , but when Clarkson ditches the wedding and runs out of the church , she is greeted with sunshine . In an interview with MTV , the lead vocalist of Yellowcard , Ryan Key , praised Clarkson in the music video . He said , " She is so unbelievably gorgeous in that video that is all over TV right now [ ... ] The wet wedding dress and the wet hair and ... come on , man ! Who knew ? She is so hot . She looks so good in it . " Robert Copsey of Digital Spy opined that the music video is Clarkson 's best video to date . The music video had a successful run at Total Request Live where it topped the chart for 33 days , a record that Clarkson holds for the longest stay by a female artist at number one on the chart . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Behind These Hazel Eyes " was included in the setlist of her Breakaway World Tour ( 2005 ) . During her concert tour at Germain Arena , Clarkson performed the song wearing the same wedding dress she wore in the song 's music video . Clarkson also performed " Behind These Hazel Eyes " on her All I Ever Wanted Tour ( 2009 ) . While touring at Hammerstein Ballroom , New York City , Clarkson sang the stripped down version of the song , accompanied by guitars and vocal . Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone felt that Alanis ' influence was evident on the chorus of " Behind These Hazel Eyes " which was performed acoustically in the event . Clarkson explained that the arrangement was intended to maximize audience sing @-@ along potential in which Jim Cantiello of MTV thought was effective . On December 2011 , Clarkson also performed " Behind These Hazel Eyes " on Chicago Theatre as part of the Miracle on State Street benefit concert . Bob Gendron of Chicago Tribune reviewed Clarkson 's performance , writing " the Texas native could 've impressed simply by projecting her booming voice and relishing its prodigious range . Yet she seemed determined to reinforce female empowerment themes often missing from her mainstream @-@ pop contemporaries ' hits . " 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 " Behind These Hazel Eyes " was covered by <unk> Pope in the third season of The Voice . According to Pope , she decided to sing the song in order to reach out to her father who divorced from her mother when she was still 11 years old . Her rendition was praised by Christina Aguilera saying , " I got to feel your heart . " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Digital download and CD single 
 " Behind These Hazel Eyes " ( Album Version ) – 3 : 16 
 " Behind These Hazel Eyes " ( Live @ Sony Connect ) – 3 : 39 
 " Behind <unk> Hazel Eyes " ( Enhanced CD Video ) - 3 : 16 
 Behind These Hazel Eyes – EP 
 " Behind These Hazel Eyes " ( Joe Bermudez & Josh Harris Mixshow Edit ) – 3 : 29 
 " Behind These Hazel Eyes " ( Joe Bermudez & Josh Harris Mixshow Remix ) – 5 : 24 
 " Behind These Hazel Eyes " ( Joe Bermudez & Josh Harris Mixshow Instrumental ) – 5 : 25 
