 A comic book , Lagaan : The Story , along with two colouring books , a mask book and a cricket board game were subsequently released to the commercial market . The comic book , available in English and Hindi , was targeted at children between the ages of six and 14 . At the book 's launch , Aamir Khan said that they were keen to turn the film into a comic strip during the pre @-@ production phase itself . 
 In March 2002 , a book titled The Spirit of Lagaan – The Extraordinary Story of the Creators of a Classic was published . It covers the making of the film , describing in detail the setbacks and obstacles that the crew faced while developing the film from concept to its release . 
 = Depression Quest = 
 Depression Quest is a 2013 interactive fiction game dealing with the subject of depression . It was developed by Zoë Quinn using the Twine engine , with writing by Patrick Lindsey and music by Isaac Schankler . It was first released for the web on February 14 , 2013 , and for Steam on August 11 , 2014 . The game tells the story of a person suffering from depression and their attempts to deal with their affliction . It was created to foster greater understanding about depression . Depression Quest can be played for free , and has a pay @-@ what @-@ you @-@ want pricing model . The National Suicide Prevention Lifeline receives part of the proceeds . 
 Depression Quest was praised by critics for its portrayal of depression and its educational value . The game was noted for diverging from mainstream uses of video games as a medium . Popular reception was more mixed , and Quinn received threats and harassment from people who disapproved of the game . False allegations that the game had received a positive review from a journalist in a relationship with Quinn triggered the Gamergate controversy . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Depression Quest is an interactive fiction game , which presents descriptions of various situations and prompts the player to choose their response . In addition , most pages feature a set of still images and atmospheric music . The game has 40 @,@ 000 words of text , and five possible endings . 
 Players assume the role of a person suffering from depression , and the story centers on their daily life , including encounters at work and their relationship with their girlfriend . The story also features various treatments for depression . Players are periodically faced with choices that alter the course of the story . To make a choice , the player must click on the corresponding hyperlink . However , choices are often crossed out and cannot be clicked on , a mechanism that Depression Quest uses to portray the character 's mental state and the fact that logical decisions may not be available to them . Beneath the choices presented to the player are a set of statements about the character , indicating their level of depression , whether or not they are in therapy , and whether or not they are currently on medication . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 The game was designed by Zoë Quinn and written by Patrick Lindsey , both of whom have suffered from depression . The soundtrack was composed by Isaac Schankler . Quinn and Lindsey started the project , with the aim of communicating how the mind of a depression sufferer functions . Quinn purposely designed the game 's protagonist as someone with an outwardly happy and easy life , so as to " <unk> the argument that someone is only depressed because they have a difficult life . " 
 Depression Quest was first released online as a web browser game on February 14 , 2013 . Quinn also submitted the game through Steam 's Greenlight program and consequently received disparaging comments and hate mail , causing her to withdraw the game from the service . After receiving positive feedback from players who had played the game and receiving an invitation to Indiecade , she tried Greenlight again . She received further harassment , but felt that she could deal with the stress . " I thought , honestly , I could take the hate if it meant the game could reach somebody who would get something out of it , feel less alone , " Quinn stated . 
 The game was accepted by Greenlight in January 2014 , and was released on Steam in August that year . The day it was due to go live , news broke that actor Robin Williams had died from a suspected suicide . Quinn considered delaying the Steam release , as she did not want to be seen as taking advantage of Williams ' death . She eventually decided to keep to the original release schedule , as she thought that making the game available to those struggling with their own problems was more important than any negative publicity she might receive , writing , " I can ’ t in good conscience hold back offering someone something that could help them start making real changes in their life for the sake of reducing the risk of offending people or hurting my own reputation . " 
 The game uses a pay @-@ what @-@ you @-@ want pricing model : it is free to play , but players can pay any amount they think is appropriate . Part of the proceeds from the game are sent to a charity – initially <unk> , but this was later changed to the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline after the game was released on Steam . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Depression Quest received mostly positive reviews from critics , who generally viewed it as not being intended for entertainment but education . Jessica Vasquez , writing for Game Revolution , praised the game 's portrayal of how sufferers are affected by depression , and expressed optimism in its potential to educate people about depression . Writing for <unk> , Adam Williams called the experience of Depression Quest to be " dark and compelling " . He added that he did not find the game fun to play , and that " it 's certainly no Super Mario Brothers , but that 's probably the point " . Tim Biggs , writing for the Sydney Morning Herald , also stressed the lack of fun in the game , and went on to say that the game was " a testing and , at times , a boring experience to go through " . However , he praised the game 's execution , and acknowledged its importance as a tool for raising awareness of depression and for helping its sufferers . 
 Writing in Ars Technica , Kyle Orland called Depression Quest " one of the most gripping and educational views on the subject [ of depression ] " . Adam Smith , in Rock , Paper , Shotgun , wrote that Depression Quest was " ' game ' as communication , comfort and tool of understanding " . In Giant Bomb , Patrick Klepek praised Depression Quest 's writing , and said that " by the end , [ he ] was able to say [ he ] understood depression a bit better " . He also warns players not to expect the game to be enjoyable , saying : " Playing Depression Quest isn 't ' fun ' , like watching Schindler 's List isn 't ' enjoyable ' . They 're important for different reasons , and it 's okay if they exist for the small audiences who will appreciate them as they are . " Depression Quest designer Quinn also headed a Playboy article which featured several video games dealing directly with the subjective experience of depression , in which she noted " I 'm very interested in games that aren 't there to make the player feel exceptional . " 
 Quinn has faced harassment in response to Depression Quest since the game 's initial release . This intensified with the additional publicity the game received on Steam . Quinn initially withdrew the game from Steam 's Greenlight service , after having a detailed rape threat mailed to her home address . When she brought Depression Quest back to Greenlight , she began receiving threatening phone calls . In mid @-@ August 2014 , soon after the game 's official Steam release , a former boyfriend of Quinn wrote a lengthy and negative <unk> about their relationship . The post alleged that Quinn had been in relationship with Nathan Grayson , a video game journalist for Kotaku . Opponents of Quinn claimed that Grayson had given Depression Quest a positive review as a result of this relationship . Investigations proved this to be false : Grayson had at no point reviewed Depression Quest . These false accusations against Quinn sparked what would later be known as the Gamergate controversy . Quinn was subjected to widescale harassment , and had her personal information leaked . This led to her fleeing her home . The game 's profile page was flooded with what the The New Yorker described as " angry user reviews " , and reviews for the game were temporarily disabled . The Daily Dot reported that 4chan 's video game board had bombarded the game 's Metacritic page with negative reviews . 
 = I Care ( Beyoncé song ) = 
 " I Care " is a song recorded by the American singer Beyoncé for her fourth studio album , 4 ( 2011 ) . It was written by Jeff Bhasker , Chad Hugo and Beyoncé and produced by Bhasker and co @-@ produced by Beyoncé . The song was recorded at the MSR Studios and was mixed by Jordan Young aka DJ Swivel at KMA Studio in New York City . " I Care " is an R & B power ballad , which also contains elements of soul music and rock music . Built on a hand @-@ clapped rhythm and pulsating beats , the song 's instrumentation consists of screeching guitars , low @-@ profile synthesizers , pounding drums , heavy percussion instrument and a piano . In " I Care " , Beyoncé admits her vulnerability to her indifferent love interest with both honesty and power . She sings with heartfelt emotion over cooing background vocals and scats alongside a multi @-@ octave guitar solo towards the end of the song . " I Care " was sent to contemporary hit radio in Italy on March 23 , 2012 as the seventh overall single from 4 . 
 " I Care " was acclaimed by contemporary music critics who highlighted the heartfelt emotion , sadness and resentment with which Beyoncé sings . Critics also complimented the way she made effective use out the power in her lower register in the first and second verses until her voice slowly builds until the commanding chorus is reached . They generally praised the guitar solo and the vocal power of Beyoncé which was displayed by " I Care " among other songs on 4 . Following the release of 4 in early July 2011 , " I Care " charted number 35 on the South Korea Gaon International Singles Chart , based on downloads alone . The song was part of Beyoncé 's set list for her revues 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé ( 2011 ) and Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live ( 2012 ) as well as The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 " I Care " was written by Jeff Bhasker , Chad Hugo and Beyoncé while production was handled by Bhasker and Beyoncé . A private listening party for Beyoncé 's fourth studio album , 4 , was held on May 12 , 2011 . She offered a select group of fans a preview of five songs from 4 and the official video for the lead single " Run the World ( Girls ) " . On that occasion , " I Care " was one of the songs previewed . Beginning on June 16 to June 27 , 2011 , the songs from 4 were available to listen to in full each day on Beyoncé 's official website , paired with its accompanying photo spread from the album packaging and an insightful quote . On June 17 , 2011 , " I Care " was the second song to be chosen . The quote found Beyoncé commenting that " I Care " is one of the many ballads which take on matters of the heart . In February 2013 , Bhasker revealed that the song was initially written for his first studio album Born on the Fourth of July released in July 2013 . He described the sound of his version of " I Care " as " a little more pure version " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Jordan Young aka DJ Swivel mixed " I Care " at New York 's KMA Studio . He told Sound on Sound , " I didn ’ t really know I was going to mix ' I Care ' until the last minute . Luckily , during the course of the album , I had a couple of days to myself and I mixed it just because I felt like it , so the demo was already somewhat mixed , and B [ eyoncé ] let me do the final mix also . " 
 " I Care " comprised 75 tracks in total : 35 for the music and 40 for the vocals . According to Swivel , the main challenge in mixing " I Care " was hand ‑ aligning every single drum shot as it was time @-@ consuming . He said , " It 's super ‑ monotonous , but it 's the best way I can do it . If you Beat Detective the drums to the grid , it 's never perfect . " As the layering of the drums had to be right on the millisecond , Swivel did one kick and snare at a time . This helped him ensure that the kicks line up with the programmed drums , hence preventing any phase inversion . Accordingly , each drum punched through as strongly as the last . The inspiration for the main drum sound on " I Care " came to Swivel at around four o 'clock in the morning during a mixing session . He took a large plate sound from Avid ’ s D ‑ Verb plug ‑ in , rolled the high frequencies off at 8 @.@ 6 kHz , and sent it through an SSL channel strip with a gate on it , setting the release time to 0 @.@ 6 seconds . He said , " It 's a really basic plug ‑ in , and I used a very [ 19 ] 80s ‑ sounding gated reverb . " 
 Once he had the sound , he rolled off the bottom to " take the muddiness out " . It was actually double reverbed ; the gated reverb was only on the snares and the toms , and the rest of the kit as a whole had another plate reverb , which came off the Lexicon 960 , for smoothing it out . Swivel said that it actually took him five minutes . According to him , the sound obtained was " a little unorthodox " and therefore , he tried to refine it . Beyoncé thought that it was better the way Swivel did it originally . Swivel commented , " ... and in all honesty , whatever works first is usually going to work best . You end up finding something you like about it , and that 's where the emotional attachment to a sound comes into play . " Swivel often replaces or augments sounds with samples , trying to realise the producer 's vision . Similarly in " I Care " , he added a couple of kicks underneath the original kick and pitched them down an octave , so that " [ the listener ] could not hear them but could feel them on big speakers . " Swivel further said that it started with " a dark , almost warehouse ‑ sounding " kick , and he then added a little thump to it . 
 Swivel dedicated much time in getting the vocal sound right , which according to him is crucial while working with Beyoncé 's music . He further explained , " I only put a quick EQ on the vocal at the end of a recording session if I have been cutting her , but mixing is far more particular , so I spent a lot of time dialling in the perfect frequency . " For the delay throws in the verses on " I Care " , he sent it through a large hall reverb at 50 percent — half reverb , half clean — then through an Amp Farm plug ‑ in for the grittiness , and that then went through a quarter ‑ note delay . In the bridge , é matches the guitar solo vocally — that was doubled — and one of the vocal tracks has an Amp Farm on it to add to that grittiness . To do justice to the multitude of vocal tracks within the song , Swivel created a stereo field using some clever panning techniques and a Waves S1 Imager plug ‑ in . He said that it was worth noting that whenever he mixes a record , " I hate hard ‑ panned L / R. To get the right width , I pan them all differently in pairs : 40 / 40 , 60 / 60 , 70 / 70 , 80 / 80 , 90 / 90 , and OK , maybe one is 100 / 100 , but this process is ultimately what creates the stereo field . " Swivel used Waves ' SSL E ‑ Channel plug ‑ in to shape Beyoncé 's lead vocal . He took a Waves S1 Imager and spread with that without isolating he width . He added that something is hard ‑ panned , it feels too isolated and also confuses the listener 's ears . Swivel explained further , " I like smooth sound , and with B [ eyoncé ] that works fine as she ’ s so good at matching everything . I like a wall of background vocals . It 's the best way of putting your vocal in every area of the stereo field : a wide sound , but you ’ ve still got something there in the middle . " 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " I Care " is an R & B power ballad . According to Cameron Adams of the Herald Sun , the song contains elements of futuristic soul music and rock music . It is built on a hand @-@ clapped rhythm , various melodies , pulsating as well as palpitating beats and a lone synth note underneath . " I Care " is instrumentally complete with screeching guitars , synthesizers , a thrashing drum machine , dense percussion instrument , and a piano . Holly Gleason of Paste magazine commented that " I Care " aurally resembles Peter Gabriel 's " Solsbury Hill " ( 1977 ) . Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle and Matthew Horton of BBC felt that the emotion and the chords present in " I Care " are reminiscent of Prince 's " Purple Rain " ( 1984 ) . Horton added that it " near @-@ equals ' 1 + 1 ' and ' I Miss You ' tug heartstrings too " . Jim Farber of the Daily News wrote that Beyoncé 's vocals over the guitar solo on " I Care " could have spun off a song by Journey . The New York Times ' Jon Caramanica compared the song with Janet Jackson 's earlier materials . Melinda Newman of the website HitFix compared the echo @-@ chamber beats with Phil Collins ' work and also noted that it was similar with Leona Lewis ' material . 
 Throughout the song , Beyoncé airs out her feelings to an indifferent partner , and delivers " indignation and beauty in equal measure " , as stated by Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune . This view was echoed by Erika Ramirez of Billboard magazine , who wrote that Beyoncé endorses " beauty in honesty and , ironically , power in admitting her vulnerability " , and Lewis Corner of Digital Spy , who noted that the " raspy and husky growls " that she adopts occasionally , show " offering moments of raw , heartfelt emotion " . Gleason wrote that the song writhes through the ache and the obsession that come from being the one left in love . Newman noted that in " I Care " , Beyoncé was " spurred and left for dead " by her lover but despite her best efforts , she still cares about him . She sings over cooing background vocals , and her voice moves " from silken to powerful , torn to potent " . 
 Over ominous keys , a keyboard opening and a repeating drum loop in the first verse , Beyoncé sings about how her relationship turned sour and puts all her cards on the table , " I told you how you hurt me , baby / But you don 't care / Now I 'm crying and deserted , baby / But you don 't care / Ain 't nobody tell me this is love / You 're immune to all my pain / I need you to tell me this love / You don 't care , well , that 's OK " . While singing the first and second verses , she pulls out the power in her lower register . Each time , her voice slowly builds until the commanding chorus is reached , where towards the end , she sings , " la la la " , in a muted saxophone line . Her voice expresses anger as she sings the chorus lines . In the second verse , Beyoncé continues the " wild @-@ eyed pleas " , as stated by Guerra and sings the lines , " Even since you knew your power / you made me cry / And now every time our love goes sour / you won 't sympathize " . Her raw vocals then punch through most powerfully at the second chorus leading up to the bridge . After the bridge , Beyoncé , this time , scats the chorus alongside a multi @-@ octave guitar solo . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " I Care " received acclaim from critics . Joanne Dorken of MTV UK wrote that " I Care " proves why Beyoncé " is still the best in the business " , further adding that her vocals are flawless as she belts out notes " we didn 't even realise were possible . " Similarly , David Amidon of PopMatters who stated that " 1 + 1 provides Beyoncé a song that " can compete with the favorites of this generation 's parents " , later wrote that " 1 + 1 " and " I Care " are " equally competent , if safer , attempts at the same formula " . He added that the songs explain why she is " head and shoulders above her Clear Channel competition in R & B " . However , he concluded that the two songs are misplaced on the <unk> of the album as " I Care " is " a jilted lover track " directly after " a pure love song " as " 1 + 1 " . The Chicago Sun @-@ Times ' Thomas Conner commented that " I Care " is a " sad but superb " song . Holly Gleason of Paste magazine noted that " I Care " creates " a backdrop for Knowles ' shaft of vocal power " , hinting that she played Etta James in the musical biopic Cadillac Records ( 2008 ) . 
 Genevieve Koski of The A.V. Club commented that " 4 sees [ Beyoncé ] stretching out vocally , particularly on the heart @-@ rending ' I Care ' . " Rich Juzwiak of The Village Voice commented that " I Care " is one of several four songs in which " deceptive calm gives way to intensity @-@ cum @-@ chorus " , and commended how Beyoncé 's essence " trembles with feeling , she seizes with emotion [ and ] her voice flutters with the intensity of a hummingbird " . Brandon Lewis of Blogcritics commended how she makes maximum use of the power in her lower register , which according to him , is very effective with the song 's " relatively short , punchy phrasing " . Ian Walker of AbsolutePunk commented that Beyoncé and " the backing production " ebb and flow as the song proceeds , and added that toward the end , she channels her inner Mariah Carey and ultimately " puts the older star to shame " . Similarly , Craig Jenkins of Prefix Magazine praised how effortlessly Beyoncé scats along with the multi @-@ octave guitar solo . 
 Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone wrote that though the song may not be an obvious single , it remains one of the finest tracks on the record . Ben Cardew of Music Week called " I Care " an " early highlight " on 4 , further praising its instrumentation and the fact that the song " feels touched with sadness , largely thanks to a fantastic chorus " . He also noted that " I Care " bears resemblance to some of The Neptunes ' " classy early tracks " . Andy Gill of The Independent wrote that " I Care " makes good use of Surfer Blood 's 2010 song " Twin Peaks " ' two @-@ chord motif . Chad Grischow of IGN commented " I Care " is one of the songs on which the Beyoncé 's vocals are superior to the lyrics , " as the lame hook pleads , ' But I care / I know you don 't care too much / But I still care ' " . NME 's Hamish MacBain showed depreciation the guitar solo , the lyrics and the " off @-@ kilter drums and moody synths " on " I Care " . Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph viewed " I Care " as an old @-@ fashioned power ballad . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Beyoncé performed " I Care " live for first time on August 14 , 2011 during her residency show 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé at the Roseland Ballroom in New York City . She performed the song in front of 3 @,@ 500 people wearing a gold dress and backed by her all @-@ female band and her backing singers , called the Mamas . Jocelyn Vena of MTV News commented that on " I Care " , Beyoncé 's vocal abilities " outshined it all . " Mike Wass of Idolator commented : 
 Sitting on top of a piano with her band and orchestra watching on , Beyonce wrung every ounce of emotion from the lyrics of ' 1 + 1 ' and hit each note perfectly . It was an impressive display , but her rendition of ' I Care ' was even better . [ Beyoncé ] whipped her hair to the brooding brass and ominous beat , while bringing the song to life with an immaculate vocal . Out of nowhere , this often @-@ overlooked track now seems single @-@ worthy . 
 The video taken from the DVD Live at Roseland : Elements of 4 was uploaded onto YouTube by Beyoncé 's Vevo account on December 21 , 2011 . It begins with the singer singing the song seated while wearing a sparkly mini dress . Later , the guitarist in her all @-@ female band comes next to her and performs a guitar solo while Beyoncé sings the bridge . Kenneth Partridge of The Boombox praised the performance writing that " the R & B megastar is all growls and snarling glances " . He further stated that she looked like " a triumphant rock ' n ' roll goddess " while performing " I Care " . A writer of The Huffington Post praised the performance writing that " ' I Care ' ... showcases an impressive amount of Beyonce @-@ ness . As she belts the lyrics ' You see these tears falling down to my ears / I swear you like when I 'm in pain / I try to tell you all my fears / You still don 't care ? / That 's okay , ' Beyonce <unk> in a sparkly getup and an impressive amount of hair @-@ whipping . " During the ITV special A Night With Beyoncé which aired on December 4 in the United Kingdom , Beyoncé performed " I Care " to a selected crowd of fans . 
 In May 2012 , Beyoncé performed " I Care " during her Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live revue in Atlantic City , New Jersey , United States ' entertainment resort , hotel , casino and spa , Revel . Jim Farber of Daily News wrote that " she delivered it with equal parts defiance and need " . Dan DeLuca of The Philadelphia Inquirer concluded , " The set list tipped too heavily at times towards bombastic balladry like ' I Care ' and ' I Miss You ' " Tris McCall of New Jersey On @-@ Line praised the performance of " I Care " during the show writing that she " matched her guitar player ’ s solo note for note during a scalding version of ' I Care . ' " In 2013 , " I Care " was part of the set list of The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour where Beyoncé performed it seated on a bar stool wearing a black fedora . The Observer 's Kitty Empire felt that the set " dip [ ped ] " with the performance of " I Care " before adding that " [ the song is ] reminding you that there is filler , even on Beyoncé albums " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 For the week ending July 2 , 2011 , " I Care " debuted at number 35 on the South Korean International Singles Chart , selling 15 @,@ 816 digital downloads . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = The Boat Race 1896 = 
 The 53rd Boat Race took place on 28 March 1896 . The Boat Race is an annual side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . In a race umpired by former rower Frank Willan , Oxford won by two @-@ fifths of a length in a time of 20 minutes 1 second , taking the overall record in the event to 30 – 22 in their favour . It was their seventh consecutive victory and the narrowest winning margin since 1877 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the boat clubs of University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities , as of 2014 it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having beaten Cambridge by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths in the previous year 's race , and held the overall lead , with 29 victories to Cambridge 's 22 . 
 Oxford 's coaches were G. C. Bourne who had rowed for Oxford in the 1882 and 1883 races , R. C. Lehmann , the former president of the Cambridge Union Society and captain of the 1st Trinity Boat Club ( although he had rowed in the trials eights for Cambridge , he was never selected for the Blue boat ) and Douglas McLean ( an Oxford Blue five times between 1883 and 1887 ) . Cambridge were coached by Stanley Muttlebury who had rowed for Cambridge five times between the 1886 and 1890 races . The umpire for the race for the eighth year in a row was Frank Willan who won the event four consecutive times , rowing for Oxford in the 1866 , 1867 , 1868 and 1869 races . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 6 @.@ 5 lb ( 79 @.@ 0 kg ) , 1 pound ( 0 @.@ 5 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Five of the Cambridge crew had rowed in the previous year 's race : boat club president Theodore Byram Hope , Herbert Aylward Game , Richard Yerburgh <unk> , Thomas Jones Gibb Duncanson and Adam Searle Bell . The Oxford crew contained three former Blues , including Walter Erskine Crum who was making his third consecutive appearance in the event . Six of the Oxford crew and two Cantabrigians were educated at Eton College . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge , the pre @-@ race favourites , won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . Starting at 1 : 03 p.m. , the race was conducted in strong westerly winds and rain showers . Cambridge started the faster of the crews and outrated Oxford by two strokes per minute , and by Craven Steps ( approximately 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) ) along the course ) they held a one @-@ third length lead . With the bend in the river in their favour , Oxford drew level by the Mile Post , but by Harrods Furniture Depository Cambridge were ahead , holding a three @-@ quarter length advantage by Hammersmith Bridge . Into the rough water past the bridge , Oxford struggled and the Light Blues were clear at The Doves pub . By Chiswick Steps they had extended the lead to one and a half lengths . 
 Despite being behind for most of the race , the Oxford stroke Harcourt Gilbey Gold maintained his crew 's pace and rhythm and along Corney Reach ( around 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) into the race ) they were overlapping the Light Blue boat . Encountering a challenging combination of wind and tide , Cambridge began to struggle by the brewery at Mortlake , and the Dark Blues took advantage , overtaking Cambridge and passed the finishing post two @-@ fifths of a length ahead in a time of 20 minutes 1 second . It was their seventh consecutive victory and the narrowest margin of victory since the 1877 race . Author and former Oxford rower George Drinkwater described the race as " one of the most stubbornly contested that has ever been rowed " . 
 = Mount Tambora = 
 Mount Tambora ( or <unk> ) is an active stratovolcano which is a peninsula of and the highest peak on the island of Sumbawa in Indonesia . Sumbawa is flanked both to the north and south by oceanic crust , and Tambora was formed by the active subduction zone beneath it . This raised Mount Tambora as high as 4 @,@ 300 m ( 14 @,@ 100 ft ) , making it one of the tallest peaks in the Indonesian archipelago in the 18th century . After a large magma chamber inside the mountain filled over the course of several decades , volcanic activity reached a historic climax in the eruption of 10 April 1815 . This eruption had a volcanic explosivity index ( VEI ) of 7 , the only unambiguously confirmed VEI @-@ 7 eruption since the Lake Taupo eruption in about AD 180 . ( The 946 eruption of Paektu Mountain might also have been VEI @-@ 7 . ) 
 With an estimated ejecta volume of 160 km3 ( 38 cu mi ) , Tambora 's 1815 outburst is the largest volcanic eruption in recorded history . The explosion was heard on Sumatra , more than 2 @,@ 000 km ( 1 @,@ 200 mi ) away . Heavy volcanic ash falls were observed as far away as Borneo , Sulawesi , Java , and the Maluku Islands . Most of the deaths from the eruption were from starvation and disease , as the eruptive fallout ruined agricultural productivity in the local region . The death toll was at least 71 @,@ 000 people , of whom 11 @,@ 000 – 12 @,@ 000 were killed directly by the eruption ; the oft @-@ cited figure of 92 @,@ 000 people killed is believed to be an overestimate . 
 The eruption caused global climate anomalies that included the phenomenon known as " volcanic winter " : 1816 became known as the " Year Without a Summer " because of the effect on North American and European weather . Crops failed and livestock died in much of the Northern Hemisphere , resulting in the worst famine of the 19th century . 
 During an excavation in 2004 , a team of archaeologists discovered cultural remains buried by the 1815 eruption . They were kept intact beneath the 3 @-@ metre @-@ deep pyroclastic deposits . At the site , dubbed the " Pompeii of the East " , the artifacts were preserved in the positions they had occupied in 1815 . 
 = = Geographical setting = = 
 Mount Tambora is on Sumbawa Island , part of the Lesser Sunda Islands . It is a segment of the Sunda Arc , a string of volcanic islands that forms the southern chain of the Indonesian archipelago . Tambora forms the Sanggar peninsula on Sumbawa . At the north of the peninsula is the Flores Sea , and at the south is Saleh Bay , 86 km ( 53 mi ) long and 36 km ( 22 mi ) wide . At the mouth of Saleh Bay is a 30 @,@ 000 @-@ hectare islet called Moyo ( Indonesian : Pulau Moyo ) which has a guest shelter or luxurious resort where celebrities such as Princess Diana once stayed . 
 Besides its interest for seismologists and volcanologists , who monitor the mountain 's activity , Mount Tambora is an area of scientific studies for archaeologists and biologists . It also attracts tourists for hiking and wildlife activities . The two nearest cities are <unk> and <unk> . Three concentrations of villages are around the mountain slope . At the east is Sanggar village , to the northwest are Doro Peti and <unk> villages , and to the west is <unk> village . 
 Three ascent routes are used to reach the caldera . The first route starts from Doro <unk> village south of the mountain , and follows a paved road through a cashew plantation until it reaches 1 @,@ 150 m ( 3 @,@ 770 ft ) above sea level . The end of this route is the southern part of the caldera at 1 @,@ 950 m ( 6 @,@ 400 ft ) , reachable by a hiking track . This location is usually used as a base camp to monitor the volcanic activity , because it takes only one hour to reach the caldera . The second route is southwest of the mountain , starting from Doro Peti village ; the Tambora volcanic monitoring station is in Doro Peti . The third route starts from Pancasila village northwest of the mountain , and passes through a coffee plantation . Using the third route , the caldera is accessible only by foot . The highest point of Tambora is on a hill near the western rim of the caldera . 
 In August 2011 , the alert level for the volcano was raised from level I to level II after increasing activity was reported in the caldera , including earthquakes and smoke emissions . 
 = = Geological history = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Tambora is 340 km ( 210 mi ) north of the Java Trench system and 180 – 190 km ( 110 – 120 mi ) above the upper surface of the active north @-@ dipping subduction zone . Sumbawa island is flanked to both the north and south by the oceanic crust . The convergence rate is 7 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) per year . Tambora is estimated to have formed around 57 @,@ 000 years ago . <unk> its strata has drained off a large magma chamber inside the mountain . The Mojo islet was formed as part of this geological process in which Saleh Bay , collapsing into the caldera of the drained magma chamber , first appeared as a sea basin , about 25 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 According to a geological survey before the 1815 eruption , Tambora had the shape of a typical stratovolcano , with a high symmetrical volcanic cone soaring up to 4 @,@ 300 m ( 14 @,@ 100 ft ) above the sea level , and a single central vent . The diameter at the base is 60 km ( 37 mi ) . The central vent emitted lava frequently , which cascaded down a steep slope . 
 Since the 1815 eruption , the lowermost portion contains deposits of interlayered sequences of lava and pyroclastic materials . The 1 to 4m thick lava flows constitute about 40 % of the layers ' thickness . Thick scoria beds were produced by the fragmentation of lava flows . Within the upper section , the lava is interbedded with scoria , tuffs , and pyroclastic flows and falls . At least 20 subsidiary or parasitic cones are known . Some of them have names : <unk> , 844 m ( 2 @,@ 769 ft ) ; Molo , 602 m ( 1 @,@ 975 ft ) ; <unk> ; Kubah , 1 @,@ 648 m ( 5 @,@ 407 ft ) ; and Doro Api Toi . Most of these parasitic cones have produced basaltic lavas . 
 = = = Eruptive history = = = 
 Radiocarbon dating has established the dates of three of Mount Tambora 's eruptions before the 1815 eruption . The magnitudes of these eruptions are unknown . The estimated dates are <unk> BC ± 200 years , 3050 BC and 740 AD ± 150 years . They were all explosive central vent eruptions with similar characteristics , but the 740 AD eruption had no pyroclastic flows . 
 In 1812 , Mount Tambora entered a period of high activity , with its climactic eruption being the catastrophic explosive event of April 1815 . 
 Mount Tambora is still active . Minor lava domes and flows have been extruded on the caldera floor during the 19th and 20th centuries . The last eruption was recorded in 1967 . However , it was a very small , non @-@ explosive eruption ( VEI = 0 ) . 
 There were reports of a similarly small eruption in 2011 . 
 = = 1815 eruption = = 
 The 1815 VEI @-@ 7 eruption had a total tephra ejecta volume of 160 km3 ( 38 cu mi ) . It was an explosive central vent eruption with pyroclastic flows and a caldera collapse , causing tsunamis and extensive land and property damage . It had a long @-@ term effect on global climate . This activity ceased on 15 July 1815 . Follow @-@ up activity was recorded in August 1819 consisting of a small eruption ( VEI 
 = 2 ) with flames and rumbling aftershocks , and was considered to be part of the 1815 eruption sequence . Around 1880 ± 30 years , Tambora went into eruption again , but only inside the caldera . Small lava flows and lava dome extrusions were formed . This eruption ( VEI = 
 2 ) created the Doro Api Toi parasitic cone inside the caldera . This was the largest and most violent eruptions in the last 5000 years along with the <unk> eruption of Lake Taupo at around 180 AD and the <unk> eruption of Baekdu around 1000 . 
 = = Archaeological work = = 
 Archaeological evidence indicates that the 1815 eruption of Mount Tambora wiped out a culture on Sumbawa . 
 = = Ecosystem = = 
 A scientific team led by a Swiss botanist , Heinrich Zollinger , arrived on Sumbawa in 1847 . Zollinger 's mission was to study the eruption scene and its effects on the local ecosystem . He was the first person to climb to the summit after the eruption . It was still covered by smoke . As Zollinger climbed up , his feet sank several times through a thin surface crust into a warm layer of powder @-@ like sulphur . Some vegetation had reestablished itself and he saw a few trees on the lower slope . A Casuarina forest was noted at 2 @,@ 200 – 2 @,@ 550 m ( 7 @,@ 220 – 8 @,@ 370 ft ) . Several Imperata cylindrica grasslands were also found . 
 Resettlement of the mountain began in 1907 . A coffee plantation was started in the 1930s on the northwestern slope of the mountain , in the village of <unk> . A dense rain forest , dominated by the pioneering tree <unk> moluccana , had grown at an altitude of 1 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 800 m ( 3 @,@ 300 – 9 @,@ 200 ft ) . It covers an area up to 80 @,@ 000 ha ( 200 @,@ 000 acres ) . The rain forest was explored by a Dutch team , led by Koster and de <unk> , in 1933 . From their accounts , they started their journey in a " fairly barren , dry and hot country " , and then they entered " a mighty jungle " with " huge majestic forest giants " . At 1 @,@ 100 m ( 3 @,@ 600 ft ) , they entered a montane forest . Above 1 @,@ 800 m ( 5 @,@ 900 ft ) , they found Dodonaea viscosa dominated by Casuarina trees . On the summit , they found sparse <unk> <unk> and <unk> . 
 In 1896 , 56 species of birds were found , including the crested white @-@ eye . Twelve further species were found in 1981 . Several other zoological surveys followed , and found other bird species on the mountain , resulting in over 90 bird species discovered on Mount Tambora . Yellow @-@ crested cockatoos , <unk> thrushes , hill mynas , green junglefowl and rainbow lorikeets are hunted for the cagebird trade by the local people . Orange @-@ footed <unk> are hunted for food . This bird exploitation has resulted in a decline in the bird population . The yellow @-@ crested cockatoo is nearing extirpation on Sumbawa island . 
 Since 1972 , a commercial logging company has been operating in the area . The logging company holds a timber @-@ cutting concession for an area of 20 @,@ 000 ha ( 49 @,@ 000 acres ) , or 25 % of the total area . Another part of the rain forest is used as a hunting ground . In between the hunting ground and the logging area , there is a designated wildlife reserve where deer , water buffalos , wild pigs , bats , flying foxes , and various species of reptiles and birds can be found . 
 In 2015 the conservation area protecting the mountain 's ecosystem has been upgraded to the status of national park . 
 = = = Exploration of the caldera floor = = = 
 = = = = Georesearch Volcanedo Germany = = = = 
 An ecosystem has developed in the caldera formed by the 1815 eruption . This ecosystem has been largely uninfluenced by human beings because of its isolation . 
 In October 2013 , a German research team ( Georesearch Volcanedo Germany , GRV ) carried out the first lengthy expedition into this <unk> deep caldera . The GRV team and a team of native helpers climbed down the inner southern wall under extreme conditions . They climbed down from <unk> to <unk> altitude to reach the caldera floor . A German geoscientist in the team was the first woman to conquer the almost impassable inner southern wall of this volcano . The team stayed within the Tambora caldera for nine days , researching the caldera floor . Very few people had reached the caldera floor before this , as descending the steep walls is difficult and dangerous , subject to earthquakes , landslides and rockfalls . Moreover , only relatively short stays on the caldera floor had been possible due to logistical problems , so that extensive studies had been impossible . 
 The investigation program of Georesearch Volcanedo on the caldera floor included researching the visible effects of the smaller eruptions which had taken place on the caldera floor since 1815 , temperature measurements ( air , soil , gases ) , gas measurements , studies of flora and fauna , and measurement of weather data . Especially striking was the relatively high activity of Doro Api Toi ( Gunung Api Kecil means " small volcano " ) in the southern part of the caldera and the gases escaping under high pressure and loud noises on the lower north @-@ east wall . 
 In July 2014 , the same research team from Georesearch Volcanedo Germany carried out a further expedition into the Tambora caldera and set a new record , spending over 12 days continuing and expanding on their research of the previous year . The results of these two expeditions are to be published . 
 = = = = Heinrich Zollinger = = = = 
 The Swiss teacher and botanist Heinrich Zollinger was the first climber to reach the eastern rim of the Tambora caldera after the eruption of 1815 . He made his ascent in 1847 with the help of a native team . 
 In August 2015 , 200 years after the big eruption , the team of Georesearch Volcanedo Germany ( GRV ) and a team of native helpers followed the route used by Zollinger and explored this area for the first time since 1847 . Even though there were no geographic coordinates of Zollinger 's ascent , the GRV team followed Zollinger 's descriptions and his historical @-@ drawn map . 
 The ascent of Mount Tambora from the east coast of the Sanggar peninsula up to the eastern rim was a particular challenge in both 2015 and 1847 . The lengthy distance to be travelled on foot , the difficult terrain , the high daily temperatures , the usual water shortage in this region in August and the high demand of drinking water during such an expedition required a detailed logistical preparation . 
 = = Monitoring Tambora = = 
 Indonesia 's population has been increasing rapidly since the 1815 eruption . As of 2006 , the population of Indonesia has reached 222 million people , of which 130 million are concentrated on Java . A contemporary volcanic eruption as large as Tambora 's 1815 eruption would cause catastrophic devastation with likely many more fatalities . Therefore , volcanic activity in Indonesia is continuously monitored , including that of Mount Tambora . 
 Seismic activity in Indonesia is monitored by the Directorate of <unk> and Geological Hazard Mitigation , Indonesia . The monitoring post for Mount Tambora is located at Doro Peti village . They focus on seismic and tectonic activities by using a seismograph . Since the 1880 eruption , there has been no significant increase in seismic activity . However , monitoring is continuously performed inside the caldera , especially around the parasitic cone Doro Api Toi . 
 The directorate has defined a hazard mitigation map for Mount Tambora . Two zones are declared : the dangerous zone and the cautious zone . The dangerous zone is an area that will be directly affected by an eruption : pyroclastic flow , lava flow and other pyroclastic falls . This area , including the caldera and its surroundings , covers up to 58 @.@ 7 km2 ( 22 @.@ 7 sq mi ) . Habitation of the dangerous zone is prohibited . The cautious zone includes areas that might be indirectly affected by an eruption : lahar flows and other pumice stones . The size of the cautious area is 185 km2 ( 71 sq mi ) , and includes <unk> , Doro Peti , Rao , Labuan <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> Toi and <unk> villages . The river <unk> at the southern and northwest part of the mountain is also included in the cautious zone . 
 = United States v. Approximately 64 @,@ 695 Pounds of Shark Fins = 
 United States v. Approximately 64 @,@ 695 Pounds of Shark Fins ( 520 F.3d 976 ) is a 2008 decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit concerning civil forfeiture in admiralty law . Judge Stephen Reinhardt wrote for a three @-@ judge panel that ordered that the shark fins be returned to their owners , reversing a decision by the Southern District of California . The government did not appeal the case further . 
 The case began in 2002 when a Coast Guard crew working from a Navy ship stopped and searched the King Diamond II , a U.S.-flagged , Hong Kong @-@ based vessel in international waters off the coast of Guatemala . On board the ship they found shark fins , equivalent to 32 @.@ 3 tons ( 29 @.@ 3 tonnes ) but without any corresponding shark carcasses . The Coast Guard , upon further investigation , found documentary evidence that the KD II had arranged to meet fishing vessels at predetermined locations and buy various quantities of fins . These activities were believed to violate the Shark Finning Prohibition Act of 2000 ( SFPA ) . The fins were thus seized and the ship escorted to San Diego , the nearest American port . 
 Federal agencies filed charges against the KD II 's owner , operator and captain . They further sought forfeiture of the fins under in rem jurisdiction , resulting in the unusual case title . Judge Barry Ted Moskowitz granted the order in 2005 . The boat 's owners appealed to the Ninth Circuit , which reversed Moskowitz three years later . It held that the seizure was illegal for three reasons : the KD II 's activities did not meet the definition of a fishing vessel under the Magnuson – Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act . Since it did not , under the SFPA , the fins could not have been lawfully seized on the high seas . In 2011 , President Barack Obama signed the Shark Conservation Act into law , which closed these loopholes . 
 = = Background = = 
 China 's late 20th century economic reforms produced a middle class that increased demand for traditional luxury items like shark fins . Chinese traditional medicine ascribes various restorative and healing effects to the fins , and the soup is considered a delicacy , costing as much as US $ 100 per bowl . The Chinese demand for fins led fishing crews to both take them from sharks in their bycatch and start fishing for sharks directly . 
 Shark populations began declining . Since they are predators near the top of the marine food chain , an umbrella species , playing an important role in maintaining ocean ecosystems , this could have serious adverse environmental consequences for marine fisheries . Campaigns began in many nations to prohibit or greatly curtail finning in both territorial and international waters and work toward international agreements on the practice . In the U.S. , President Bill Clinton signed the Shark Finning Prohibition Act ( SFPA ) into law in 2000 shortly before leaving office . It amended the Magnuson – Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act , the primary statute regulating fisheries in the U.S. ' s Exclusive Economic Zone up to 200 nautical miles offshore , to prohibit finning in U.S. territorial waters by any vessels , and the possession of fins by a U.S.-flagged vessel in international waters or the landing of any fins at a U.S. port without corresponding carcasses amounting to at least 20 times the weight of the fins . The National Marine Fisheries Service ( NMFS ) was charged with promulgating and implementing regulations to enforce the act . 
 During Congressional debate on the SFPA , Eni <unk> , non @-@ voting Delegate to the House of Representatives from American Samoa , had expressed concerns about the lack of language barring vessels from engaging in transshipment of fins , such as purchasing those taken by other vessels on the high seas . To stop this , he introduced an amendment to the bill banning the possession of the fins without the carcasses by fishing vessels , as defined in the Magnuson – Stevens Act , and the landing of same by any vessel . Congress assumed that this language would be sufficient to accomplish its intended purpose . 
 = = Underlying dispute = = 
 On August 13 , 2002 , the U.S. Navy destroyer USS Fife was in international waters southeast of Acapulco , Mexico , when it observed the King Diamond II , an 84 @-@ foot ( 26 m ) U.S.-flagged vessel owned by Tran and Yu , Inc , a shipping company in Hong Kong , its home port . The Fife 's crew asked more questions over the radio . It learned that the KD II , having sailed out of Honolulu some time ago , was on its way from Honolulu to Guatemala . 
 A Coast Guard detachment aboard the Fife confirmed that it was properly flying the U.S. flag . The Coast Guard was suspicious since the ship was low in the water , suggesting it was carrying heavy cargo , yet there were no cranes or other equipment that a legitimate fishing vessel would be expected to have . Instead there were several large shipping containers . Via radio , they asked the Joint Interagency Task Force West , a consortium of various federal law enforcement agencies , for permission to investigate further , since smugglers and drug traffickers were known to use that route . 
 After receiving permission to do so , the Coast Guard boarded the KD II . The stench of decaying flesh quickly led them to a large quantity of shark fins . They were in bundles on the deck , the shipping container and filling most of the 40 @-@ ton ( 36 @-@ tonne ) hold , where the ammonia odor was so strong that the Coast Guardsman who found them had to breathe through his mouth since it burned his nose . Since no corresponding carcasses could be found , the task force told the boarding party that this indicated a likely violation of the SFPA , and to consider the ship a crime scene as the fins were contraband . 
 Two days later , the Coast Guard cutter Chase took over , escorting the KD II to San Diego . Along the way the investigation continued . The Coast Guard reported that the four @-@ man crew was cooperative with the investigation , largely sitting back and watching television in the lounge . Since they claimed not to have finned the sharks themselves , they believed they had not done anything wrong . Ship 's records revealed that the KD II had met fishing vessels , primarily Korean longline fishing boats , at prearranged locations on the high seas near the Fiji and Solomon Islands and bought fins from them for a total of $ 250 @,@ 000 . On an earlier voyage that summer , the ship had made $ 6 million from shark fins obtained the same way . Korean @-@ language records from a broker on board indicated an ongoing operation , giving the names of other ships involved . The refrigeration unit on board had broken before the ship had left Honolulu , and the fins were out on deck in an attempt to dry them out and reduce the odor . 
 In San Diego the fins were unloaded and weighed . It took a crew of eight seven hours to unload all the fins , most of which had been tied into 2 @-@ by @-@ 3 @-@ foot ( 60 by 90 cm ) bundles weighing roughly 100 pounds ( 40 kg ) each . They were put on trucks to be secured in a cold @-@ storage facility as evidence pending the outcome of any legal proceedings . At 32 @.@ 3 tons ( 29 @.@ 3 tonnes ) , the total was more than twice the anticipated amount , making it the largest seizure of shark fins ever . It was estimated that the fins represented a total of 30 @,@ 000 sharks taken . 
 = = Litigation = = 
 In early 2003 the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) Fisheries Office for Law Enforcement finished its investigation and charged Tran and Yu ; Tai Loong Hong Marine Products Ltd . , of Hong Kong , for whom the fins had been bought ; and Chien Tan Nguyen , captain of the KD II , with 26 counts of violating the SFPA . They were assessed fines of $ 620 @,@ 000 , the highest civil penalty ever levied for a violation of the act . 
 Tai Loong believed that the government had exceeded its statutory authority by confiscating the fins . It argued that before Judge Barry Ted Moskowitz , a federal district judge for the Southern District of California , who granted an injunction against NOAA prohibiting it from selling the fins itself . The company and the agency then agreed that , in return for the former putting up a $ 775 @,@ 000 bond , that it would take possession of the shark fins , although they remained in cold storage pending the outcome of the case . Tai Loong presold the fins for an amount almost equal to the fine against it . NOAA then initiated a civil forfeiture action with the bond substituting for the fins . 
 = = = District court = = = 
 In 2004 the government went before Moskowitz seeking summary judgement . The case turned on whether the KD II was a fishing vessel under the SFPA . Early in 2005 he issued his ruling , holding that while it was not directly engaged in fishing it was nevertheless engaging in activities supporting fishing and thus also subject to the SFPA . He did not grant the forfeiture as NOAA had not moved for it yet . 
 The SFPA deferred to the Magnuson – Stevens Act for its definition of a fishing vessel . According to that statute , a fishing vessel was one that either engaged in fishing , or " aiding or assisting one or more vessels at sea in the performance of any activity relating to fishing , including , but not limited to , preparation , supply , storage , refrigeration , transportation , or processing . " Moskowitz rejected NOAA 's argument that the KD II was engaged in fishing and therefore a fishing vessel because , under its previous ownership , it had been equipped with longline equipment and held a federal permit . That had lapsed shortly after Tran and Yu bought the ship and was no longer valid , so neither was the argument based on paper . " Whether the KD II is in fact a fishing vessel under [ the first definition ] depends on its configuration and how it was outfitted at the time of the seizure , " he wrote . Since there was nothing in the record about that , he declined to decide the question on that grounds . 
 There was more to consider when Moskowitz turned to the support aspect . " Simply put , the issue in this case narrows down to whether the KD II is a vessel which was used for , equipped to be used for , or of a type which is normally used for aiding or assisting one or more vessels at sea in the performance of any activity relating to fishing . " On this question Moskowitz agreed with NOAA . By going from ship to ship to buy , store and transport the fins , the KD II and its crew " directly aided and assisted the foreign vessels in an expressly enumerated fishing activity under the statute . " 
 Moskowitz qualified his interpretation by disagreeing with the government 's assertion that the mere purchase of the fins constituted an activity in support of fishing , pointing out that that would make into a fishing vessel any ship where someone aboard purchased a single fin for personal use . But in this case the KD II and its crew had acted as a middleman , " effectively br [ <unk> ] the shark fin market to the foreign fishing vessels at sea . This act , in and of itself , aided and assisted the foreign fishing vessels which no longer had to store , transport , and land their shark fins in order to sell them in the market . " By doing so , they had saved time and money for the other fishing vessels they had taken fins from . He cited a document in the records , a communication between Tran and the Korean broker explicitly saying that a rendezvous " will save our time and cost " as proof . 
 " Commonsense suggests that buying fish from fishermen at sea for resale is an activity related to fishing under the SFPA , " wrote Moskowitz . " Selling the fish at sea saves the storage , transportation and landing expenses necessary to bring the fish to market , thereby increasing the profitability of the voyage . By going from ship to ship purchasing a total of 64 @,@ 695 pounds of shark fins for resale in the wholesale market , the KD II aided and assisted an activity related to fishing within the plain meaning of the statute and became a ' fishing vessel . ' " 
 Moskowitz found reinforcement in the NMFS regulations implementing the SFPA . " The prohibition of landing shark fins without corresponding carcasses extends to any vessel ( including a cargo or shipping vessel ) that obtained those fins from another vessel at sea , " their preamble read . " Any such at @-@ sea transfer of shark fins effectively would make the receiving vessel a ' fishing vessel , ' as the receiving vessel is acting ' in support of fishing . ' " Tai Loong had claimed that language applied only to vessels landing shark fins , and not just those possessing them as the KD II had at the time of its interdiction , but Moskowitz responded that the use of " any " indicated a broader reach . 
 The bill 's legislative history showed that Congress had intended that broad reach . Senator Ernest Hollings had , in opposing the bill , worried that it might bar American ships from the shark fin trade entirely . The Congressional Budget Office had found that the bill enacted a mandate to that effect in its report to the House of Representatives . " Thus , the legislative history confirms that the SFPA applies to the KD II and its possession of 64 @,@ 695 pounds of shark fins , " wrote Moskowitz . 
 Lastly , Tai Loong had argued , even if the KD II was a fishing vessel under the statute , the interplay between two sections of the SFPA and its implementing regulations rendered them unconstitutionally vague , making it impossible for it to easily determine whether the statute applied to the KD II . It argued that this failure of the government to thus provide adequate notice that the law would be enforced against such vessels was a violation of their right to due process . 
 Moskowitz found the Supreme Court 's decision in Hoffman Estates v. The Flipside relevant to his analysis . There , the Court had reversed the Seventh Circuit and upheld a local ordinance imposing restrictions on the sale of drug paraphernalia . Like the SFPA , Moskowitz observed , that ordinance , too , had been enforced only with civil penalties , and was primarily an economic regulation aimed at business activity , which businesses can reasonably be expected to study and prepare for . " Accordingly , the SFPA provisions do not merit strict scrutiny for vagueness . " 
 Under a lesser standard , Moskowitz strongly rejected the vagueness argument . " [ T ] he fishing vessel definition here is patently broad on its face , " he wrote . " So broad , in fact , that an ordinary person of reasonable intelligence would think that the KD II 's activities would probably be included in the blanket fishing vessel definition rather than exempt from it ... Commonsense indicates that picking up fish or its parts at sea aids fishing and thereby renders the vessel within the express definition of a ' fishing vessel ' under [ Magnuson – Stevens ] . " He found further that the publication of the SFPA regulations by the NMFS in the Federal Register constituted constructive notice to Tai Loong . " A reasonable person in the shark fin business would be aware of the SFPA 's application to the KD II 's activities . " 
 = = = Appeals court = = = 
 Tai Loong appealed , working out stipulations with NOAA to expedite that process . Foremost among them was an agreement on the market value of the fins , $ 618 @,@ 956 , to be forfeited if the appeals court ruled in Tai Loong 's favor . The district court granted the forfeiture in the middle of 2005 , and the case went to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals . 
 Judges Stephen Reinhardt , Raymond C. Fisher and Richard R. Clifton ( nominated to the court by presidents Jimmy Carter , Bill Clinton , and George W. Bush respectively ) were empaneled to hear the case . After oral arguments in May 2007 , they announced their decision ten months later , in March 2008 . <unk> , they reversed Moskowitz and ruled that the KD II was not a fishing vessel , therefore the fins had not been lawfully seized . 
 " In this case , " wrote Reinhardt , " we find nothing in the plain meaning of [ the statute ] that would provide notice to the owners of the KD II that its activities would render it a fishing vessel . " He read the text of the statute closely to show where Moskowitz had erred . Indeed , the ship had " refrigerate [ d ] , store [ d ] and transport [ ed ] " the fins , but the governing words were " aid and assist " . Reinhardt cited dictionary definitions of both words as " generally <unk> [ ing ] doing an act for the benefit of another . " He explained at length why the purchase of an item does not constitute aid or assistance to the seller : 
 In this case , the <unk> of the KD II did not purchase , store or transport shark fins for the benefit of the foreign fishing vessels . Instead , they purchased the fins for their own commercial purposes . The foreign fishing vessels had no interest in the shark fins after selling them to the KD II . As a result , the KD II 's subsequent post @-@ purchase storage and transport of the shark fins did not benefit the foreign vessels any more than the purchaser of any other product aids and assists the seller by storing the goods it has acquired in a warehouse or transporting them to the location at which it intends to resell them . Nor does the mere act of purchasing constitute an act of aiding and assisting a seller . Otherwise it would not be necessary in criminal statutes that are intended to punish buyers as well as sellers of illegal substances to specify the former group expressly . It would be enough that selling is proscribed and that a purchaser bought the illicit product . Under the district court 's theory , the simple act of purchasing would make a buyer an <unk> or abettor . This is simply incorrect . 
 He noted that " purchase " was not specifically included as a support activity in the statute . 
 For the same reasons , Reinhardt rejected Moskowitz 's finding that , specifically , the purchase of the fins at predetermined locations on the high seas aided the fishing vessels the KD II purchased the fins from , since it was at all times acting on its own interests . " [ It ] may have been beneficial or even necessary to those vessels ' business operations , but the choice did not change the nature of the purchasers ' actions in any respect , " he observed . " They still purchased the fins , stored them and transported them for their own commercial purposes . From the standpoint of the purchaser , any benefit to the seller was incidental . " 
 Even the letter to the broker specifically stating that the at @-@ sea purchases would save " time and expense " was not convincing . 
 [ I ] t does not establish that the failure or inability to make such arrangements with respect to all the foreign vessels constituted aiding or assisting those to which the KD II actually went . Surely , purchasing all the shark fins at the dock would have been preferable for [ Tai Loong ] ( if the cost were to remain the same ) , and surely the sellers benefited from selling at a particular location , just as they benefited from making the sale in the first place . Nevertheless , wherever the purchase is made , the purchaser is doing no more than making a purchase that it desires to make for its own business reasons . As a result , while the district court 's assumption that the seller would benefit from the location of particular sales appears reasonable , it is irrelevant . 
 While the court recognized Congress 's intent to curtail and eventually eliminate shark finning by passing the SFPA , " the broad purpose of the Act provides no help to the government with regard to the issue on appeal , " Reinhardt wrote . He turned finally to the regulations , where he pointed out that Moskowitz had applied the language from the preamble too broadly . " [ I ] n context , [ it ] suggests the opposite . " Instead of being a case of a vessel with shark fins bound for an American port , the case was instead covered by the regulations on possession , since the KD II was bound for a foreign port , and those provisions were specific to fishing vessels . " Where an agency includes language in one section of the regulation and omits it in another , it is reasonable to presume that the agency acted intentionally in forgoing the language , " he wrote , paraphrasing parallel Supreme Court precedent regarding Congressional intent . " 
 " Taken together , " Reinhardt concluded , " the regulations and the preamble may be reasonably read to provide notice that vessels that engage in at @-@ sea transfers of fins , are prohibited from landing shark fins in a U.S. port , but they do not provide notice that such vessels are prohibited from possessing fins for the purpose of making a delivery to a foreign port . " He also noted that the preamble had language stating it was not the NMFS 's intent to interfere with international trade . " Under the circumstances , a reasonable person would not have fair notice that the activities of the KD II would render it a fishing vessel under [ the statute ] . As a result , we hold that the district court 's application of the possession prohibition of the SFPA to the KD II as a fishing vessel ... violated due process . " 
 = = Shark Conservation Act = = 
 Within a month of the decision , Madeleine Bordallo , Delegate from Guam , introduced the Shark Conservation Act in the U.S. House to close the loophole created by the decision . It eliminated the fins @-@ to @-@ carcass ratio entirely and replaced it with language forbidding any U.S.-flagged vessel , not just a fishing vessel , from carrying shark fins not naturally attached to the corresponding carcass , mirroring a law already adopted by Hawaii . In his later report on the bill , Rep. Nick Rahall , the committee chair , said that Congress had believed in 2000 the language of Magnuson – Stevens was sufficient to prevent transshipment . The new legislation 's primary purpose , he stated explicitly , was to close the loophole the decision opened . 
 The bill was referred to the Natural Resources Committee , which then referred it to its Subcommittee on Fisheries , Wildlife and Oceans , chaired by Bordallo . Hearings were held a week later , at which Shelley Clarke , a researcher at Imperial College London who studies the shark @-@ fin trade , observed that transshipment operations such as the KD II 's were common and would likely continue as the competition in Hong Kong , the industry 's traditional center , grew more intense . While the transshipment ban was an effective response to the decision , she suggested that shipments of containerized fins be allowed if they had been separated from their carcasses after landing . 
 In the report , Rahall did not directly criticize the court , but Don Young of Alaska , the committee 's ranking member , did . In a section for additional views at the end of the report , he called the Ninth Circuit 's decision " mistaken . " The KD II 's action " was clearly a violation of the Act , but the court ruled otherwise , " he wrote . " The court was clearly wrong in their decision and I am glad that we are overriding the court decision in this case . " 
 In June the subcommittee met to mark up the bill . Bordallo 's amendment tightening the language prohibiting vessel transport of fins was passed by voice vote . A week later the full committee , after adding an amendment by <unk> requiring that fins be attached to the carcasses , sent the bill to the full House . In July it was passed by voice vote and referred to the Senate , where it was sponsored by John Kerry of Massachusetts . It was read twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce , Science and Transportation . No further action was taken before the 110th Congress adjourned , and the bill died . 
 Bordallo reintroduced it , as amended , at the beginning of the next Congress . It gained 30 cosponsors , bypassed the committee stage and was passed by voice vote in March 2009 . Kerry reintroduced it in the Senate a month later ; it eventually gained 33 cosponsors there . The Senate Subcommittee on Oceans , Atmosphere , Fisheries and Coast Guard held hearings on the bill in June . 
 The Senate report , by Jay Rockefeller of West Virginia , reiterated that " The bill would clarify in statute what was already popularly understood to be the scope of application of the SFPA " prior to the case , but did not otherwise make any commentary regarding it . A group of shark attack survivors visited senators ' offices to lobby for the bill in July . It was passed near the end of the year and signed into law by President Barack Obama on January 4 , 2011 . 
 = Acid Tongue = 
 Acid Tongue is the second studio album by American singer @-@ songwriter Jenny Lewis , released in September 2008 ( see 2008 in music ) through Warner Bros. and Rough Trade Records . Inspired by jam sessions , the album was recorded in January 2008 in Van Nuys , California with the intent of capturing a more live feeling than 2006 's Rabbit Fur Coat . Lewis worked with a number of guest musicians and wrote the album with boyfriend Johnathan Rice . Lewis , Rice , Jason Lader , and Dave Scher produced the album . Acid Tongue features musical styles ranging from indie rock to alternative country and Americana . 
 Acid Tongue was released to generally favorable reviews from contemporary music critics , receiving praise for Lewis ' lyrics and vocals . However , some reviewers criticized the numerous collaborations and felt the sound overwhelmed Lewis . The album charted at number twenty @-@ two in the United States and number fifty @-@ five in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Influences and recording = = 
 Lewis first began work on Acid Tongue after writing the title track on her Rabbit Fur Coat tour . She attempted to work out an arrangement for Rilo Kiley 's Under the Blacklight . It didn 't work , so Lewis recorded it for a second solo album . 
 According to the Los Angeles Times , Lewis was inspired by house parties at Jonathan Wilson 's Laurel Canyon home . " We 'd go to these jams in the canyon . They 're fantastic . Jonathan invites older session musicians from the real Laurel Canyon era , and younger people who are just starting their bands who happen to live in the canyon , and we all get together and sing Grateful Dead covers and J. J. Cale songs . " Lewis herself has said that it " rocks a little harder , " in contrast to Rabbit Fur Coat 's folk rock influences . Lewis also used Rilo Kiley 's Under the Blacklight , which was notably polished compared to the band 's earlier work , " as a reference point to go in the complete opposite direction " . She explained that every song she writes is " a response to the thing that I 've written before " . " It 's even as simple as , ' OK , I 've written a ballad , now I want to push myself to write something that 's up tempo . ' If I 'm writing about myself , well , that subject can be tiresome , so then I focus on character @-@ driven songs . So I 'm always doing this back @-@ and @-@ forth just to keep myself interested . " 
 The album was recorded in just three weeks at Sound City Studios in Van Nuys , California . The album was co @-@ produced by Lewis 's boyfriend Johnathan Rice , former Beachwood Sparks and All Night Radio member Dave Scher , and Under the Blacklight producer Jason Lader . Lewis attempted to record as many of the songs live as possible . " We did it in the studio for my 32nd birthday , " according to Lewis , " and we had a great time , collaborating with a bunch of friends . It was definitely a lot less focused than Rabbit Fur Coat . With that record I had a very specific vision , [ ... ] but with this record it was really more about the vibe , the songs and the collaborations " . A source quoted by Entertainment Weekly said that the album " all sounds super natural , nice , and simple . Like it doesn 't belong in any decade . It 's just timeless . " The album was inspired by a variety of musical styles , including alternative country , Americana , indie rock , and soul . 
 Talking to Nashville Scene , Lewis said that the songs " weren 't written off @-@ the @-@ cuff , but they were definitely recorded , not carelessly , but with a real effort to capture a live feeling , particularly with the vocals " . Lewis continued , " To me , it 's a big step in a different direction ... and to be able to sink into the vocal take while the band was playing was a very liberating experience for me . " Lewis told The A.V. Club , " We played them on the road 100 times , so we knew that we could walk into the studio and record them the same way . [ ... ] It wasn 't really a studio record , but more of a live record in some ways . It was about getting the band together and creating an atmosphere that lent itself to good chemistry between the band members and trying to capture as much of the record live as we could . " As " a child of digital generation " , Lewis had generally worked with Pro Tools , but wanted to capture the " not @-@ perfect sound " of some of her favorite records . 
 The musicians were split into two separate bands . The Band A setup ( Jason Boesel , Davey Faragher , Johnathan Rice , and Blake Mills ) would generally play the more rock and roll songs , while Band B would play the ballads . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The album 's title track was described by Lewis as her " thinly veiled way of getting out of writing a strictly ' confessional ' song , " Lewis told Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune . " I may be a liar , or I may not be one . " The song also referenced a childhood experience of Lewis ' , in which she experienced LSD at the age of 14 . 
 " The Next Messiah " , a nine @-@ minute " ode to Barbra Streisand and the devil , " was " tracked completely live , with all the transitions , and it 's the most exciting thing I 've ever been involved with in the studio . I wish the rest of the record had been more like that . " The song is " actually three different songs that Johnathan Rice and myself wrote together , " according to Lewis . " I happen to be a Barbra Streisand fan , and Barbra Streisand fancies a medley , so we discussed stringing the three songs together . " 
 The album features a duet with Elvis Costello , " Carpetbaggers " . The song was written by Lewis ' boyfriend , Johnathan Rice , to be performed on the Rabbit Fur Coat tour , because they were lacking uptempo songs . Lewis wanted to " make it less country and a little more pop . So I emailed Elvis . He mentioned he had two new songs and would we be open to recording them . " These songs became part of Costello 's <unk> . 
 She & Him 's Zooey Deschanel provides backing vocals on a number of songs , while her bandmate M. Ward plays " a moody guitar part " on " Pretty Bird " . Ward said that Acid Tongue is " the greatest record Jenny has ever made . " There are a number of other collaborations on Acid Tongue ; fellow Rilo Kiley member Jason Boesel , Davey Faragher of Costello 's band The <unk> , Benji Hughes , Ana and Paz Lenchantin , Chris Robinson of The Black Crowes , and Jonathan Wilson all make contributions . The album features production credits from Lewis ' boyfriend Johnathan Rice , Farmer Dave Scher , and Rilo Kiley producer Jason Lader . 
 Lewis 's sister Leslie Lewis provides backing vocals on two tracks , while her father Eddie Gordon plays the bass harp and harmonica . " He was ill last year , so we started speaking to one another , " Lewis told The Independent . " There were no hard feelings . He just wasn 't around . Every couple of years I 'd get a postcard from the road – a picture of him standing next to a giant ice @-@ sculpture of a crab , in Alaska . He was a very mysterious character . But I thought this was the right time to bring him in . " " The Next Messiah " was influenced by her father . " When someone isn 't around you create what you imagine your father might be – ' a race @-@ car driver , a four @-@ leaf clover ' , " Lewis explained . Lewis has said that a lot of her inspiration , for both Acid Tongue and previous work , comes from her parents . Lewis also told The Independent , " I just don 't know them very well . And I 'm still trying to understand what happened [ with the divorce ] and why . It 's this blank slate , I can 't even remember what happened . But for some reason , these two people are so incredibly strange and funny and beautiful and messed up , that I want to keep writing about them ... and maybe figure out who I am in the process . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Entertainment Weekly announced that Lewis had been working on the album in February 2008 . Prior to Acid Tongue 's release , Lewis allowed listeners to hear the title track by calling the toll @-@ free telephone number 1 @-@ 888 @-@ 717 @-@ ACID . The song was later replaced by a recording announcing two " secret " performances in September , including a password and website to obtain tickets . Additionally , several videos were put up on Lewis ' official YouTube page . The videos show Lewis ( or band mates ) at home being visited by Ben Gibbard , of Death Cab for Cutie and The Postal Service , who has arrived with balloons to listen to the new album . Ben is told that the album isn 't out yet , but Lewis agrees to let him hear " just one song " . This is followed by a recording of the title track " Acid Tongue . " 
 On September 9 , the entire album was made available in streaming format on Lewis ' official MySpace page . Though not technically downloadable , it was quickly accessed through other means and made available through file sharing . The album was released in both CD and LP formats in a number of territories throughout late September . Select independent record stores also gave away a 7 " single of " The Next Messiah " , split between the two sides of the record . Lewis toured in support of the album 's release , including an appearance at the Austin City Limits Festival and opening for Conor Oberst . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Acid Tongue has received generally favorable reviews , scoring a 75 % on review aggregator Metacritic . Creative Loafing said that while Rabbit Fur Coat " glided through an Appalachian dream world " , Lewis " stomps her boots while exploring similar terrain " on Acid Tongue . The review continued that while the album " includes plenty of quirky meditations on lost love that recall her previous adventures , [ ... ] well @-@ placed jolts give Acid Tongue greater balance , a component that 's lacking on Rabbit Fur Coat . " According to The Sunday Times , " the results are magnificent , [ ... ] but occasionally they are a shaky misstep . " Chicago Sun @-@ Times writer Jim DeRogatis called Acid Tongue " sensual and entrancing . " The Daily Trojan labeled the tracks as " psychedelic , occasionally sexy , but always timeless " , although noting that the album " lacks a thematic focus that can be found on every other album Lewis has released " . 
 Filter referred to the album 's title track as " simply beautiful , causing goosebumps to the arms of even the toughest man . [ ... ] It 's rather deep , despite its simplicity , a difficult task to say the least . " It has also been called " a prime example of Lewis ' simplistic genius . " The Times said " the verses in the title track tickle and tease so that you are practically salivating for the chorus . " 
 It was also noted that Lewis ' " delicately seductive vocals are more versatile " , with the Detroit Free Press stating that her voice " smoothly mixes classic country with pop and indie @-@ rock , Lewis is as adept on the ballads as she is on the rave @-@ ups . " The Times considered Lewis ' songwriting " leagues ahead of anything that she has done in the past " and her vocals sound " as though she means it " . DeRogatis pointed out that " Lewis ' impressive strength as both a singer and a songwriter is that she makes every listener feel as if her music was crafted just for them . " However , Angela Zimmerman of Crawdaddy ! felt that Lewis often used a " pervasive soprano that she can 't quite execute " on tracks like " Black Sand " , " Pretty Bird " , " Trying My Best to Love You " , and " Jack Killed Mom " . 
 Pitchfork Media said that while Acid Tongue is " immediately pleasurable , " the album 's downfall is that " Lewis does such a good job of nailing choice sounds and styles from pop 's past that you can 't help getting reeled in right away ; only upon later reflection do you realize that much of her success lies in evoking something else great rather than achieving a greatness more uniquely her own . " The review continued , " In these straitjacketed settings , Lewis ' considerable strengths as a lyricist and performer just aren 't given sufficient room to fully emerge . " Time noted that Acid Tongue " sprawl with misplaced ambition " and that only the title track sticks . Another review observed , " Lewis seems to be [ ... ] on her way to a more definitive musical existence [ ... ] but she doesn ’ t quite seem to know yet . " Acid Tongue was also slated for its " hip @-@ hop @-@ like roster of unnecessary cameos . Zooey Deschanel and M. Ward of She and Him make sense , but Elvis Costello sounds intrusive during his duet on " Carpetbaggers , " while the black Crowes ' Chris Robinson is just superfluous . " Crawdaddy ! ' s Zimmerman said that while " these appearances help flavor the record , [ ... ] I miss the Watson Twins . " 
 The album was made number 14 in Blender 's 33 Best Albums of 2008 list , and number 46 in Q 's 50 Best Albums of the Year 2008 . It was also voted number 18 in Rolling Stone 's Readers ' Top 30 Albums of 2008 list . " Acid Tongue " was number 66 on Rolling Stone 's list of the 100 Best Songs of 2008 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 Acid Tongue entered the Billboard 200 at number 24 with approximately 21 @,@ 000 copies sold . It also reached number fifty @-@ five on the UK Albums Chart . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Production — Farmer Dave Scher , Jason Lader , Jenny Lewis , Johnathan Rice 
 Artwork design — Jenny Lewis , Pierre De Reeder 
 Photography — Autumn de Wilde 
 = Sid Barnes with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 = 
 Sid Barnes was a key member of Donald Bradman 's famous Australian cricket team , which toured England in 1948 . The team went undefeated in their 34 matches ; this unprecedented feat by a Test side touring England earned them the sobriquet The Invincibles . A right @-@ handed opening batsman , Barnes was part of Bradman 's first @-@ choice team and played in four of the five Tests — he missed one match due to injury — partnering the left @-@ handed Arthur Morris . 
 Barnes ended the first @-@ class matches with 1 @,@ 354 runs at a batting average of 56 @.@ 41 including three centuries , placing him fifth in the aggregates and sixth in the averages among the Australians . Barnes found his best form in the Tests , yielding 329 runs at 82 @.@ 25 , ranking him third in the aggregates and second in the averages . He scored half @-@ centuries in both innings of the First Test at Trent Bridge , before compiling a hard @-@ hitting 141 in the second innings of the Second Test at Lord 's , helping to set up victory in both matches . In the Third Test , Barnes was injured and hospitalised after being hit in the ribs by a Dick Pollard pull shot . He returned the next day and attempted to bat , but collapsed again and had to be taken back to hospital for an extended stay , missing two weeks of cricket . After missing the Fourth Test , Barnes returned to score his third half @-@ century for the series as Australia completed a 4 – 0 win with an innings victory in the Fifth Test . 
 Aside from his run @-@ scoring , Barnes , who was well known for being eccentric , gained fame throughout the season for his fielding at short leg — just a few metres from the batsman — where he took 19 catches for the season . Barnes stood much closer than others who fielded in the position , placing one foot on the edge of the pitch . His extreme proximity prompted questions about the legitimacy of his action and English captain Norman Yardley later admitted that Barnes had intimidated his batsmen . 
 = = Background = = 
 Barnes had been a regular member of the Australian cricket team since World War II and was on his second trip to England after making his Test debut there in 1938 before the war . During the 1946 – 47 Australian season , which saw England tour for five Tests , the home nation 's senior opening batsman Bill Brown was injured . Barnes and debutant Arthur Morris had averaged 73 @.@ 83 and 71 @.@ 85 respectively , playing in all five matches . 
 Barnes went to England in the Australian winter of 1947 . In his autobiography , he claimed to have gone as a representative for an alcohol company , although appears to have dealt in commodities that were in short supply due to rationing . Once in England , he was approached by Burnley to play as a professional in Lancashire League cricket , which he did briefly before becoming disinterested and resigning . Barnes returned to Australia for the 1947 – 48 season , keen to win a place on the 1948 tour to England . He was worried that having played as a professional in the Lancashire League would damage his chance of further Test cricket , as the Australian authorities frowned on those who played professionally in England . There was also concern that , with his wife now living in Scotland , he would breach the Australian Board of Control 's rule that wives were not allowed to travel with players , by being in the same overseas country . 
 Brown , Barnes and Morris shared the opening duties against the visiting Indians ; their batting averages were 43 @.@ 00 , 52 @.@ 25 and 42 @.@ 66 respectively . With Brown recovered , the Australian selectors dropped Barnes for the first two Tests against the Indians . However , Brown struggled and made only 18 and 11 runs — Australia batted once in both Tests — and was then dropped for Barnes , who made only 12 and 15 in the Third Test . Retained for the Fourth Test , Barnes made 112 in an Australian victory . Morris — whose place was secure — was rested for the Fifth and final Test to give Brown another chance to show that he was worthy of selection . Barnes made 33 while Brown made 99 run out as Australia completed a 4 – 0 series win . In the end , all three were selected for the England tour , though Barnes had to give assurances about the amount of contact he would have with his wife — still living in Scotland — before he was confirmed . As specialist opening batsmen , the trio were competing for the two opening positions in Bradman 's first @-@ choice team . 
 Barnes brought along half a tonne of baggage on the sea voyage to England , including a lot of food and drink , particularly alcohol , which was scarce due to the war and subject to rationing . There Barnes would sell his goods . During the journey , the players had to sign autographs on 5 @,@ 000 sheets of paper with the team list . Barnes had a stamp of his signature made , and paid a young boy drinks to deal with the sheets , but he landed himself in trouble with captain Don Bradman and manager Keith Johnson when the boy stamped the sheets erratically , sometimes not adjacent to Barnes 's position on the team list . 
 = = Early tour = = 
 Australia traditionally fielded its strongest possible team in the tour opener , which was customarily against Worcestershire . Barnes opened with Morris , while reserve opener Brown batted out of position in the middle order . The hosts won the toss and batted first , and Barnes took the last two catches as Australia dismissed them for 233 . He delivered nine overs with his leg spin and was the most economical Australian bowler , conceding ten runs without taking a wicket . When Australia batted , Barnes made 44 from 104 balls in 99 minutes before being the first batsman to fall at 1 / <unk> Australia reached 462 and dismissed the hosts for 212 to complete a victory by an innings and 17 runs . During the second innings , Barnes took his first wicket for the tour , having Laddy <unk> caught behind by Don Tallon to spark a collapse that saw the home side lose their last five wickets for 47 runs . Barnes ended with 1 / 25 and took two catches in the second innings ; all four of his catches for the match were from spinners . 
 Morris was rested for the following match against Leicestershire , so Barnes partnered Brown at the top of the order . The pair put on 46 before Brown fell . Barnes then put on 111 with Bradman for the second wicket before falling for 78 at 2 / 157 to a leg before wicket ( lbw ) decision the tourists regarded as a clear error . Unhindered , Australia made 448 and won by an innings . Barnes took two catches in the first innings , both from spinners , and bowled four overs without success in the second innings . The Australians proceeded to play Yorkshire at Bradford , on a damp pitch favourable to slower bowling . Bradman rested himself and Barnes as Australia came closest to losing a match for the whole tour . The tourists were 6 / 31 in pursuit of 60 for victory — effectively seven wickets down with one injured player — before scraping home to win by four wickets . 
 Barnes returned for the subsequent fixture against Surrey at The Oval in London , where Australia won the toss and batted first . Barnes attacked immediately , and put on an opening partnership of 136 with Morris , before the latter fell . Bradman and Barnes put on another 207 for the second wicket before Barnes fell for 176 . The tourists continued to build on the foundation laid by the top order and were eventually bowled out for 632 . Bradman ’ s bowlers dismissed Surrey for 141 and 195 to win by an innings after enforcing the follow on . During the match , Barnes was involved in an oft @-@ recalled incident . After a series of Australian appeals had been turned down in the match against Leicestershire by umpire Alec Skelding , Barnes had remonstrated with him and told him he had problems with his eyesight . Barnes also complained about Skelding <unk> him lbw , saying the ball " wouldn 't have hit another set of stumps " and telling the umpire to get a guide dog . A stray dog ran onto the field during the Surrey game . It caused a stoppage in play by evading the players and police for a few minutes . Eventually , Barnes used the ball to bait and trap the dog , which he then presented to Skelding stating : " You must need a dog . You 're blind when you give those decisions [ against Leicestershire ] not out " and " Now all you want is a white stick " . Skelding refused the offer , and after Barnes continued to pressure him into taking the dog , he called for an adjournment and left the playing arena . Barnes later wrote " Strange how I suggested he find himself a canine companion at Leicester ... and then one turned up ... Cricket 's a funny game . " 
 Barnes was rested for the following game against Cambridge University , which Australia won by an innings . In the next match against Essex , Barnes returned as Australia elected to bat first and went on to score a world record of 721 first @-@ class runs in one day . Barnes opened with Brown and they laid the platform for the record @-@ breaking total by combining for a stand of 145 before Barnes was out for 79 attempting a late cut . It was Australia 's largest opening partnership on the tour to date and lasted 97 minutes . After completing their innings , the tourists proceeded to victory by an innings and 451 runs , their biggest winning margin for the summer . In the first innings , Barnes fielded at point @-@ blank range at silly mid @-@ on when Ray Smith was batting against the bowling of Ernie Toshack . Smith hit one ball past Barnes , narrowly missing his head , but the Australian vowed to continue standing in close proximity . In the next over , Smith drove a full ball from Toshack directly into Barnes 's foot , who managed to hide any pain despite the ball having enough momentum to ricochet all the way to the boundary . The subsequent delivery was hit straight at Barnes 's torso . Barnes reacted fast enough to get his hands on the ball , but it broke through and hit his chest before rebounding . He was able to grab the ball with one hand and Smith was out ; Barnes then told the stunned batsman " I told you you wouldn 't drive me away " . Later , Barnes 's torso and foot had to be attended to . Barnes finished off the match by trapping Peter Smith for 54 in the second innings after Australia enforced the follow on , claiming the last wicket to end a tidy spell of 1 / 11 from 9 @.@ 4 overs . Barnes was rested for the following fixture against Oxford University , which resulted in another innings victory . 
 The following match was against the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) at Lord 's . The MCC fielded seven players who would represent England in the Tests , and were almost a full strength Test team , while Australia fielded their first @-@ choice team . Bradman chose Barnes and Morris as his preferred opening pair , while Brown continued out of position in the middle order . Barring one change in the bowling department , the same team lined up in the First Test , with the top six batsmen in the same position . For players on both sides , it was a chance to gain a psychological advantage ahead of the Tests . Australia won the toss and batted and Morris fell with the score at 1 / 11 . Barnes added 160 for the next wicket with Bradman before falling for 81 with the score at 2 / 171 . Bradman 's men went on to amass 552 and bowled out the hosts for 189 and 205 to win by an innings ; Barnes caught John Deighton and Jack Robertson and took 0 / 15 from four overs . During the match , Barnes again gained attention for placing himself extremely close to the batsman when fielding at short leg , with one foot on the edge of the cut strip . According to retired Australian Test batsman Jack Fingleton , himself a former fielder in the leg trap , " [ Barnes ’ s position ] was the closest I have ever seen any fieldsman on the leg side " . Bradman had suggested Barnes do so when leading English batsman Len Hutton was playing , in an attempt to distract or intimidate him . Barnes later claimed he was at little risk as Hutton was reluctant to hook Australia 's pace bowlers towards him and preferred to duck bowling aimed at his upper body . He said Hutton often talked pessimistically to teammates and that the Australians would benefit if they dampened Hutton 's confidence . Although Hutton top @-@ scored in both innings , scoring 52 and 64 , Barnes said the batsman 's eyes betrayed discomfort . The theatrical Barnes also decided to test the umpire 's patience by hovering his foot over the pitch , as though he were about to place it down on the batting surface , which was against the laws of cricket . Umpire Frank Chester , who was also known for his flamboyance and penchant for making himself visible , at one point held up proceedings momentarily when Barnes feigned to put his foot on the surface as the bowler was preparing to deliver the ball . 
 England and MCC captain Norman Yardley later admitted Barnes 's close proximity throughout the season had a psychological effect on his batsmen , although the Australian did miss catches because he was too close to react to the oncoming ball . 
 The MCC match was followed by a draw against Lancashire at Old Trafford ; this was the first time the tourists had failed to win since arriving in England . Barnes made 31 in both innings after the first day was washed out ; the match ended in a draw . Barnes was rested in the subsequent match against Nottinghamshire , which saw a second consecutive draw . He returned for the next game against Hampshire , as Australia had another scare . On a drying pitch , the hosts dismissed Australia for 117 in reply to 195 ; this was the first time the tourists had conceded a first innings lead on the tour . Barnes made 20 . Hampshire fell for 103 in their second innings to leave Australia a target of 182 , which was reached to seal an eight @-@ wicket win , despite Barnes falling for a duck . The final match before the First Test was against Sussex and Barnes was rested as Australia dismissed the hosts for 86 and replied with 5 / 549 declared before completing another innings victory . 
 = = First Test = = 
 Having overcome food poisoning leading up to the match , Barnes was selected for the First Test at Trent Bridge , as were the other two openers in the squad . England elected to bat first , and Australia 's fast bowlers reduced the home side to 8 / 74 before finishing them off for 165 late on the first afternoon . In Australia 's reply , Barnes partnered Morris at the top of the order , while Brown played out of position in the middle order . The pair had less than 15 minutes of batting before the scheduled close of play . Barnes made an appeal against the light after the first ball of the innings , which was a wide by Bill Edrich . Barnes walked down the pitch and was reported to have casually muttered to umpire Frank Chester " Eh , the light ! " , which appeared to shock the official . During the previous Ashes series in Australia in 1946 – 47 , Barnes continuously appealed against the light , forcing cricket authorities to limit the batting team to one appeal , after which only the umpire can call off play , at his own prerogative . Morris and Barnes successfully negotiated the new ball attack of Edrich and Alec Bedser to reach stumps at 17 without loss , with Morris on 10 and Barnes on 6 . Despite the appeal against the light , the Australians showed little desire to be watchful against Edrich 's bowling , scoring 11 runs from his two overs . However , Barnes had been fortunate , edging both Edrich and Bedser through the slip cordon . 
 Ideal batting conditions and clear skies greeted the players on the second morning . Barnes batted assuredly , while Morris was hesitant and shuffled around the crease . At one stage , Morris scored only seven runs in 55 minutes . Barnes was involved in some interplay with umpire Chester when the latter stopped a drive from Morris with his foot . Barnes picked the ball off the wicket and handed it to the bowler , prompting Chester to wag his finger in disapproval . Barnes responded by admonishing the umpire for blocking the ball . 
 Barnes and Morris took the score to 73 before the latter was out for 31 after two hours of batting . Bradman came in and Yardley set a defensive field , employing leg theory to slow the scoring . The hosts ’ captain packed the leg side with fielders and ordered Bedser to bowl at leg stump . Barnes reached his half @-@ century after 135 minutes at the crease with a pull for four from Charlie Barnett . The score progressed to 121 before Barnes cut Jim Laker onto the thigh of wicket @-@ keeper Godfrey Evans . The ball bounced away , but the gloveman turned around and took a one @-@ handed diving catch to dismiss Barnes for 62 . Umpire Ernest Cooke was unsure of whether Barnes had hit the ball into the ground before Evans took the catch , and consulted with Chester , who had been standing at point on the other side of the field , before ruling the batsman out . Keith Miller came in and was dismissed for a duck without further addition to leave Australia 's total at 3 / 121 . Australia went on to reach 509 all out on the third day , yielding a 344 @-@ run first innings lead . 
 With leading paceman Ray Lindwall injured , Australia ’ s bowling stocks were stretched and Barnes was brought on during England 's second innings and as the fifth bowler to give the others some time to rest . Barnes delivered five overs and conceded 11 runs . In foggy and misty conditions , Joe Hardstaff junior brought up England 's 200 with a firmly @-@ struck hook that almost hit Barnes , who was standing at point @-@ blank range at short leg and could not duck before the ball went past . 
 England were eventually out for 441 on the final day , leaving Australia a target of 98 . Bradman ’ s men progressed quickly at the start of the chase . Barnes took 13 runs from the opening over by Bedser , including three boundaries , whereas Morris again lacked fluency . However , Barnes continued to score quickly , and 24 runs came from the first four overs . The tourists proceeded steadily to 38 from 32 minutes before Morris fell for nine . Bradman came to the crease and fell for a duck after 12 minutes in the middle . This left Australia at 2 / 48 ; dark clouds began to close in on the ground , and rain appeared to be a possible saviour for England . However , it never came ; Lindsay Hassett joined Barnes and they took the tourists to the target without further loss after 87 minutes of batting . Barnes gave Jack Young an opportunity for a return catch , but the ball was dropped . Barnes tied the scores with a swept boundary and ran off the field with a souvenir stump , believing the match was over . He tossed his souvenir back into the playing arena and returned to the field after noticing the reaction of the amused crowd and realising his mistake ; Hassett proceeded to hit the winning run . Barnes ended unbeaten on 64 with 11 boundaries ; he scored prolifically with his square cut . The next morning , he perused all of the newspapers , expecting to be heavily rebuked by analysts for reckless batting on the final day , but they instead focused on his captain 's failure to score . 
 Between Tests , Barnes played in the match against Northamptonshire , which started the day after Trent Bridge . Barnes made 11 and bowled three wicketless overs as Australia cruised to victory by an innings . In the second match — a drawn fixture against Yorkshire — before the Second Test , Barnes managed only a duck — bowled at the start of the match by a swinging yorker from Ron Aspinall — and six . 
 = = Second Test = = 
 Australia opted to field an unchanged lineup for the Second Test at Lord 's , the home of cricket . Before the match , Barnes wagered £ 8 at 15 / 1 on himself to score a century , and trained especially diligently in the lead @-@ up to the Lord 's fixture . He was motivated because the Australian Board of Control had given his wife rare permission to attend the match , and the refusal of the authorities at Lord 's to allow him to practise there when he was in London a year earlier ; Barnes saw a strong personal performance as an ideal response to what he regarded as a snub . On the first morning , Bradman won the toss and elected to bat , and Barnes continued his run of low scores since the First Test . The first over bowled by Bedser to Barnes was watchfully played to complete a maiden . The debutant Alec Coxon opened the bowling with Bedser and removed Barnes for a duck in his second over , caught by Len Hutton at short fine leg . Barnes tried to knock the short delivery through square leg but misjudged the pace of the wicket and played his shot too early , <unk> the ball to Hutton , and leaving Australia at 1 / 3 . They eventually reached 350 and bowled England out for 215 early on the third day . 
 The weather was fine as Australia started their second innings just after noon . On the second ball of the innings — bowled by Bedser — Barnes got off the mark to avoid his pair . Coxon took the new ball at the other end and Barnes and Morris saw it off . In contrast to their English counterparts , the Australian opening pair began cautiously , avoiding the hook shot and not playing at balls that were not going to hit the stumps , establishing a solid start for themselves . Keen to win his bet , Barnes was particularly determined . He survived a stumping opportunity from Laker when he was 18 ; he came down the pitch and the ball bounced out of the footmarks past the bat and narrowly missed the leg stump , but Evans fumbled the ball , which went away for four byes , giving Barnes a life . Barnes took advantage of the let @-@ off to combine with Morris for an opening stand of 122 , as Yardley made frequent bowling changes in an attempt to disrupt the Australian pair . Morris stopped shuffling , while Barnes adopted a strategy of pre @-@ emptively moving down the pitch to attack the off spin of Laker . Earlier in the tour , Barnes had often been bowled or trapped leg before wicket ( lbw ) while trying to force off breaks into the leg side from the crease . On this occasion , he drove Laker into the pavilion for six and Australia reached 0 / 73 at the luncheon adjournment with Barnes on 25 , an overall lead of 208 . After lunch , Morris was bowled for 62 . Bradman joined Barnes and the Australian skipper played and missed a few times before settling down . Barnes responded to his captain 's difficulties by manipulating the strike and shielding Bradman from Bedser . The Australian opener had little trouble against the leg trap Bedser set for him , scoring freely into the leg side and taking the shine off the second new ball . Generally however , Barnes also scored sedately after lunch , and after one extended period of defence , he drove Laker for four through the covers , eliciting a round of ironic applause . Barnes responded to the public gallery by placing his hand on his chest and bowing to the spectators . Barnes had started slowly , but accelerated after reaching his half @-@ century . He reached 96 with Australia at 1 / 222 half an hour after tea . By this time , the pace of the pitch appeared to have slowed , making batting relatively easy . 
 Barnes lingered for a further ten minutes on 96 before reaching his century with a straight drive from Laker . He had taken 255 minutes and hit ten fours in reaching triple figures . Having registered his century and fulfilled his bet , Barnes became particularly aggressive . He stepped out of his ground to attack Laker , but missed , as did Evans , who was unable to stop the ball as it spun down the leg side . Barnes dispatched one Laker over for 21 runs , including two consecutive shots over the long on boundary and two fours . Barnes was finally removed for 141 , caught on the boundary by Cyril Washbrook from the bowling of Yardley . He struck 14 boundaries and two sixes in his innings and the speed of his batting had allowed Australia to reach 2 / 296 in 277 minutes after a 174 @-@ run partnership with Bradman . Hassett was bowled first ball , so Miller came to the crease at 3 / 296 to face the hat @-@ trick ball . He survived a loud lbw appeal to deny Yardley his hat @-@ trick ; Australia consolidated and eventually declared at 7 / 460 on the fourth day . 
 England faced a target of 596 , which would have required a world record Test run @-@ chase — no team had successfully chased down more than 400 for victory . Early on , Washbrook pulled Lindwall for a four , almost collecting Barnes in the nose in his customary short leg position . Australia bowled out the hosts for 186 to win by 409 runs and take a 2 – 0 lead . 
 The next match was against Surrey and started the day after the Test . After 16 days of cricket in 20 calendar days , Barnes was rested as Australia completed a 10 @-@ wicket win . Barnes returned for the following game against Gloucestershire . The tourists elected to bat first and Barnes — playing many square cuts — made 44 in an opening partnership of 102 with Morris , who went on to top @-@ score with 290 . Australia reached 7 / 774 declared , its highest score for the tour , laying the groundwork for a victory by an innings and 363 runs . When Australia was fielding , Barnes was not at his characteristic close @-@ range position , but spent much of the time at third man or fine leg near the edge of the playing arena . At times , Barnes wandered about aimlessly between various positions , but Hassett , captaining in place of the resting Bradman , did not attempt to command him . 
 = = Third Test = = 
 The teams reassembled at Old Trafford for the Third Test . Australia dropped Brown , who had scored 73 runs at 24 @.@ 33 in three Test innings in his unfamiliar position in the middle order . Yardley won the toss and elected to bat , and England made 363 . Barnes caught his first victim for the Test series , the diminutive debutant opener George Emmett , who was surprised by a rising ball from Ray Lindwall . Emmett took his eyes from the ball and fended with one hand on the horizontally @-@ held bat , while ducking his head down below his arms ; the ball bounced slowly off the pitch and after hitting Emmett ’ s bat , rebounded gently up in the air to Barnes , leaving England at 2 / 28 . Barnes dropped two catches later in the day , but neither cost Australia substantially . Jack Crapp hit Ernie Toshack to Barnes at short leg , who failed to hold the catch . However , Crapp did not capitalise and was out soon after . During the same middle session , Yardley hit Toshack to Barnes , who was again unable to complete the reflex catch . However , Yardley was dismissed shortly after for 22 . Tail @-@ ender Dick Pollard came to the crease on the second morning and pulled a ball from Ian Johnson into the left ribs of Barnes , who was standing at short leg , almost on the edge of the cut strip . According to Fingleton , Barnes " dropped like a fallen tree " , and a minority of spectators loudly celebrated the injury . Briefly paralysed on his left side , he had to be carried from the ground by four policemen and taken to hospital for an examination . 
 Australia came out to bat halfway through the middle session on the second day , after England had ended on 363 . Having dropped Brown , Barnes 's injury left Australia with only one specialist opener , Morris . Johnson — a bowler — was deployed as Australia 's makeshift second opener and fell for one . On the third morning , Barnes came out to bat upon Keith Miller 's dismissal at 4 / 135 , even though he had collapsed from the aftereffects of his injury while practising in the nets . Barnes had refused to stay in hospital and returned to the ground despite his ribs being discoloured from the bruising . Bradman was not aware of Barnes 's collapse in the nets , but had told all rounder Sam Loxton to bat before Barnes to give the bruised opener more rest . Loxton told Barnes of Bradman 's wishes , but when Miller was dismissed , Barnes defied team orders and walked out to bat , shaking Pollard 's hand at the start of his innings . 
 He made a painful single in 25 minutes of batting before it became too much . The bruising severely restricted his mobility and breathing , and he turned down a single after being called through by Loxton , who had come in at the fall of Morris . Soon after , the pair took a single , and Barnes collapsed after completing the run . Barnes was taken from the ground with the assistance of Bradman among others , and sent back to hospital to recuperate for several days . He took no further part in the match , which ended in a rain @-@ affected draw ; Johnson again fell for single figures in the second innings . After the Test , Barnes — still injured — missed the ten @-@ wicket victory over Middlesex at Lord 's . The match was Australia 's only fixture between Tests . 
 = = Fourth Test = = 
 The teams headed to Headingley for the Fourth Test , with Barnes still unfit . Australia made two changes for the match . Neil Harvey came in for Barnes , while Ron Saggers replaced Don Tallon — who had a finger injury — behind the stumps . Wisden commented that the England batsmen welcomed the freedom brought by the absence of Barnes from the forward short leg position . Brown was not recalled to open ; instead , Hassett was promoted to the top of the order to partner Morris , while the teenager Harvey slotted into the middle @-@ order . Hassett struggled , making 13 and 17 , but Australia nevertheless completed a world record Test run @-@ chase of 3 / 404 to seal the series with a seven @-@ wicket win . 
 Barnes returned from injury after two and a half weeks on the sidelines immediately after the Fourth Test . He made 24 as Australia amassed 456 and defeated Derbyshire by an innings . He delivered 14 overs in the second innings , taking 0 / 6 , the most economical figures in the match apart from one bowler who bowled a solitary maiden . When Australia fielded , a point of interest for onlookers was where Barnes would field ; he stayed at mid @-@ wicket , well clear of the batsman . Barnes made 31 in the next game against Glamorgan , a rain @-@ affected draw that did not reach the second innings . After being given out lbw to Allan Watkins , he walked off visibly showing his displeasure at the umpiring decision , believing the ball would have missed leg stump . The hosts fell for 197 and Australia reached 3 / 215 when inclement weather ended the match . 
 Barnes was rested as Bradman ’ s men defeated Warwickshire by nine wickets . He returned as the tourists faced and drew with Lancashire for the second time on tour . Barnes top @-@ scored in the first innings with 67 , putting on an opening stand of 123 with Morris as Australia made 321 . He continued his productivity with 90 in the second innings , adding 161 for the second @-@ wicket with Bradman . The home side managed to hang on for a draw , seven wickets down in their second innings . Barnes was then rested for the non @-@ first @-@ class match against Durham , a rain @-@ affected draw that did not reach the second innings . Australia made 282 and had the hosts at 5 / 73 in reply when rain washed out the match after the first day . 
 = = Fifth Test = = 
 Australia headed south to The Oval for the Fifth Test . Barnes resumed his opening position , while Hassett returned to his customary position in the middle order . England won the toss and elected to bat on a rain @-@ affected pitch . Propelled by Ray Lindwall 's 6 / 20 , Australia skittled England for 52 in 42 @.@ 1 overs on the first afternoon . 
 In contrast , Australia batted with ease , as the overcast skies cleared and the sun came out . Morris and Barnes passed England 's first innings total by themselves , taking less than an hour to push the Australians into the lead . O ’ Reilly felt the Australian openers wanted to prove " the pitch itself had nothing whatever to do with the English batting debacle " . The only chance came when Barnes powerfully square cut Bedser low to point , where Young spilled the catch . When Young came on to bowl , his finger spin was expected to trouble the batsmen on a rain @-@ affected surface , but he delivered little variation in pace and trajectory and Barnes in particular hit him repeatedly through the off side field . Australia reached 100 at 17 : 30 , with Barnes on 52 and Morris on 47 . They took the score to 117 before Barnes was caught behind from Eric Hollies for 61 , ending a 126 @-@ minute stand . Barnes stumbled forward to a fast @-@ turning leg break that caught his outside edge . He had overbalanced and would have been stumped if he had failed to make contact with the ball . Australia finished at 389 on the second day and bowled out the hosts for 188 in the second innings , sealing victory by an innings and 149 runs to complete a 4 – 0 series win . 
 = = Later tour matches = = 
 Seven matches remained on Bradman 's quest to go through a tour of England undefeated . Barnes was rested as Australia defeated Kent by an innings immediately after the Fifth Test . In the subsequent game against the Gentlemen of England , Barnes made only 19 before Australia declared at 5 / 610 against a team with eight Test players . Barnes sent down a total of eight overs for figures of 0 / 28 as Australia went on to complete an innings victory . Barnes made 42 before retiring ill in the next match against Somerset . Having batted first , the tourists went on to declare at 5 / 560 and won by an innings and 374 runs . In the following match against the South of England , Barnes made a duck . Australia declared at 7 / 522 and bowled out the hosts for 298 before rain ended the match . 
 Australia 's biggest challenge in the post @-@ Test tour matches was against the Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI . During the last Australian campaign in 1938 , this team was effectively a full @-@ strength England outfit , but this time Bradman insisted only six current England Test players be allowed to represent the hosts . After his opponents had finalised their selection , Bradman fielded a full @-@ strength team ; the only difference from the Fifth Test team was Johnson ’ s inclusion at the expense of Doug Ring . The Australian bowlers skittled the hosts for 177 , and Barnes put on 102 with Morris before the latter fell for 62 . Bradman joined Barnes and the pair put on 225 for the second wicket . Barnes finished with 151 , including 15 fours and 4 sixes , after throwing his wicket away to Laker 's bowling , and Australia declared at 8 / 469 . The hosts were 2 / 75 when the match ended in a draw after multiple rain delays . 
 The tour ended with two non @-@ first @-@ class matches against Scotland . Barnes made five as Australia scored 236 in the first match . He then bowled nine overs — including seven maidens — and conceded nine runs as Australia won by an innings . Barnes was rested for the second match , which also ended in an innings victory . 
 = = Role = = 
 Barnes played in four of the five Tests as a right @-@ handed opening batsman , partnering the left @-@ handed Morris , although he batted at No. 6 in the Third Test due to his rib injury . Three opening batsmen were taken on the tour , Brown being the third . During the tour matches , which were usually played consecutively with one or no days between fixtures , Bradman rotated the trio , generally to rest one from the match while the other two <unk> Notable exceptions occurred in the first two Tests , the opening match against Worcestershire and the warm @-@ up match against the MCC . In those matches , Australia fielded its first @-@ choice team and as a result , Brown played out of position in the middle order while Morris and Barnes opened . An occasional leg spin bowler , Barnes delivered only 65 @.@ 4 overs during the first @-@ class matches , five of which were in Tests . He took two wickets , both outside the Test arena . 
 Barnes ended the first @-@ class tour with 1 @,@ 354 runs at 56 @.@ 41 including three centuries , placing him fifth in the aggregates and sixth in the averages among the tourists . Barnes 's form peaked in the Tests , scoring 329 runs at 82 @.@ 25 ; among the Australians he ranked third in the aggregates and second in the averages . 
 An eccentric and strong @-@ willed character who was not afraid to go against convention , Barnes stationed himself as close to the bat as possible when fielding at either forward short @-@ leg or silly point . The tour report in the 1949 edition of Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack judged Barnes 's fielding to be as important as his batting in the team ’ s success : 
 Probably a number of batsmen were sufficiently affected by his close attendance to cause them to lose concentration on the bowler running up , but equally important was the fact that the knowledge of his presence influenced opponents to avoid strokes in that direction . The Barnes demeanour in the field illustrated the general purposefulness of the Australians . 
 However , Barnes received criticism for this approach , including from Fingleton , who fielded there during his playing career . A letter was published in English newspapers , questioning Bradman on whether Barnes 's position was legitimate — the writer thought Barnes 's close proximity yielded an unfair advantage over the batsmen . Bradman later touted Barnes as the best fieldsman he had seen in the position , while England skipper Yardley admitted Barnes had worried the home team 's players . Fingleton said that if the position was unfair , then it was the umpires ' duty to take action . He further said the batsmen should have tried to deter Barnes from standing so close by aiming shots at him , deeming the Australian to be " of great value in a nuisance capacity throughout the tour " . After several near @-@ misses , he was finally hit in the Third Test and missed two weeks of cricket , but he was not injured again after his resumption . Barnes took 19 catches for the season , although only one came in the Tests . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Barnes used the opportunity of travelling around England to pursue his business interests , cutting many deals . When he was rested from the first match against Yorkshire , he stayed in the capital and made deals at the London Exhibition . During breaks in play , or when Australia was batting and he had already been dismissed , he often spent the time inspecting local factories and talking to other businesspeople . An important concern for Barnes , when returning to Australia by boat after the tour , was to avoid paying customs duties on the enormous amount of goods he acquired through various deals during the tour . This included fine English cloth , which was in very short supply in Australia . Hearing a rumour that customs officers were waiting in Sydney for him , Barnes disembarked at Melbourne and travelled to Sydney by train . The move worked and he sold his stock at a substantial profit , conservatively estimated to be equal to his tour fee . Upon returning to Australia , Barnes opted out of first @-@ class cricket to focus on business interests . He wrote a newspaper column , in which he often criticised cricket administrators and the small share of revenue they gave to players . Barnes wrote in a confrontational manner , often lampooning and angering the authorities . 
 At the beginning of the 1951 – 52 season , Barnes returned to the New South Wales team in a bid to regain his Test position , and performed well . He was chosen by the selectors but the board disallowed his selection for conduct reasons rather than ability . The media figured this out and publicised it , and Barnes was overlooked for the whole season . Speculation abounded as to the nature of his supposed misdeeds . These included jumping the turnstile at a ground when he forgot his player 's pass , insulting the royal family , theft from team @-@ mates , drunkenness , stealing a car , parking his car in someone else 's space , or that Barnes had lampooned the board in the narration accompanying the home movies he made of the 1948 tour . In later years , a file of unknown authorship was found ; it accused Barnes of allowing young spectators to enter the playing arena to field the ball instead of doing so himself , and of denigrating umpires by making gestures implying they were blind . 
 The Board had a secret dossier documenting Barnes 's behaviour and they doctored the minutes of the meeting at which they discussed his selection . The matter came to a head when a letter attributed to man named Jacob Raith was published in the paper , criticising Barnes 's character , and praising the board , which prompted Barnes to sue with the intention of prising out an explanation for his omission . Cricket administrators were called to testify about the matter and more details became public . According to cricket historian Gideon Haigh , " it was effectively the Board , not Raith , in the dock " . 
 Keith Johnson , the team manager during the 1948 tour , became the centre of attention . He wrote and had always claimed that the touring party had been completely harmonious and loyal . A series of administrators came forward to say that Barnes had misbehaved on the 1948 tour , even though Johnson 's official report had made no mention of any problems . There were also positive reports . Aubrey Oxlade , the chairman of the board , said that the batsman 's indiscretions were " childish things " and " not serious at all " . Frank Cush , another board member who had supported Barnes 's inclusion , replied " none at all " when asked if there were any legitimate reasons for excluding Barnes . Selector Chappie Dwyer said " I have a very high opinion of him as a cricketer ... and I have no objection to him as a man " . 
 Johnson was called as a witness , and under questioning , a different story came out . Johnson agreed that his written report of the 1948 tour had said that the team had behaved " in a manner befitting worthy representatives of Australia " and that " on and off the field their conduct was exemplary " . However , in a verbal report , Johnson said he had drawn the board 's attention to various misdemeanours by Barnes during the 1948 tour that , in his opinion , were sufficiently serious to warrant the player 's exclusion from future Australian Test sides . Johnson said that Barnes had shown a " general reluctance for anything savouring of authority " . The misdeeds included taking pictures as the Australian team was presented to the royal family on the playing arena during the Second Test at Lord 's , asking permission to travel alone in England — Barnes ' family was living in Scotland at the time — and " abducting " twelfth man Toshack to play tennis during the match at Northamptonshire on a court " 300 yards from the pavilion " . Under cross @-@ examination , Johnson said that Barnes 's photography of the royal family at Lord 's was the most serious incident . He admitted he had not known that Barnes had received permission to take the photos . Barnes 's lawyer then established that his client had then shown the films to raise money for various charities . He further showed that Barnes had not agitated when reminded of the policy against players meeting with family members on tour . However , Johnson believed that the cumulative effect of the misdeeds " warranted omission from the team " and he saw no problem in the fact that his verbal advice to the board recommending Barnes ' exclusion was at odds with the written report on the 1948 tour . Under cross @-@ examination , Johnson admitted that " I don 't always write what I think " , and ended up being embarrassed by Barnes 's lawyer . The case collapsed on its second day , after Barnes was issued with a public apology regarding the letter . After the libel trial , Johnson resigned from all cricket administration , while Barnes continued to be overlooked . Although the court case portrayed " an awful image of the chaos and bigotry under which Australian cricket was administered " , it did little to alter the board 's culture towards players . 
 = = = General notes = = = 
 = Typhoon Fengshen ( 2002 ) = 
 Typhoon Fengshen was the strongest storm of the 2002 Pacific typhoon season . It developed on July 13 from the monsoon trough near the Marshall Islands , and quickly intensified due to its small size . By July 15 , Fengshen attained typhoon status , and after initially moving to the north , it turned toward the northwest . On July 18 , the typhoon reached its peak intensity of 185 km / h ( 115 mph 10 ‑ minute winds ) , according to the Japan Meteorological Agency . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center estimated peak winds of 270 km / h ( 165 mph 1 ‑ minute winds ) , and the agency estimated that Fengshen was a super typhoon for five days . This broke the record for longest duration at that intensity , previously set by Typhoon Joan in 1997 , and which was later tied by Typhoon Ioke in 2006 . 
 While near peak intensity , Typhoon Fengshen underwent the Fujiwhara effect with Typhoon Fung @-@ wong , causing the latter storm to loop to its south . Fengshen gradually weakened while approaching Japan , and it crossed over the country 's Ōsumi Islands on July 25 as a severe tropical storm . The typhoon washed a freighter ashore , killing four people and forcing the other 15 crew members to be rescued . In the country , Fengshen dropped heavy rainfall that caused mudslides and left $ 4 million ( ¥ 475 million 2002 JPY ) , in crop damage . There was an additional death in the country . After affecting Japan , Fengshen weakened in the Yellow Sea to a tropical depression , before moving across China 's Shandong Peninsula and dissipating on July 28 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Late on July 13 , a tropical depression developed near the Marshall Islands northeast of Kwajalein Atoll . The cyclone quickly strengthened into Tropical Storm Fengshen just six hours after forming . On July 14 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) initiated warnings on Fengshen just two hours after first monitoring the disturbance . By that time , the system consisted of a distinct circulation with developing convection , located in an area of weak wind shear . The storm initially moved northwestward , emerging from the monsoon trough as a small cyclone . Quick intensification followed , and an upper @-@ level low to the northwest assisted in providing outflow . After a 13 km ( 8 mi ) wide eye developed , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) upgraded Fengshen to a typhoon on July 15 to the southwest of Wake Island ; the JTWC also upgraded the storm the same day . 
 On July 16 , Fengshen turned sharply westward due to a subtropical ridge to its northwest , and it maintained that movement for the next four days . By late on July 18 , the JMA estimated that Fengshen attained maximum sustained winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph 10 ‑ minute ) , around the same time the JTWC upgraded the storm to a super typhoon . After maintaining its peak intensity for 24 hours , Fengshen weakened slightly and began a turn to the northwest . The weakening was possibly due to an eyewall replacement cycle , and although previously it was a small storm , the typhoon gradually increased in size . Around that time of its weakening , Fengshen began undergoing the Fujiwhara effect with Typhoon Fung @-@ wong ; the latter looped to the south of Fengshen and dissipated on July 29 . On July 21 , Fengshen began re @-@ intensifying , and the JMA reported that the typhoon again reached winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph 10 ‑ minute ) . At around the same time , the JTWC estimated winds of 270 km / h ( 165 mph 1 ‑ minute ) . Fengshen retained much of its intensity until July 22 , being a super typhoon for five days . This set the record for greatest duration at the intensity , surpassing the previous record of 114 hours set by Typhoon Joan in 1997 ; Fengshen 's record was later tied by Typhoon Ioke in 2006 . 
 After several days as a powerful typhoon , Fengshen began a weakening trend due to decreased outflow and dry air . It weakened below super typhoon status after being at that intensity for five days . On July 24 , Fengshen turned more to the west while passing to the south of mainland Japan , and the next day it weakened below typhoon intensity . At 1145 UTC on July 25 , Fengshen made landfall on Yakushima in Japan 's Ōsumi Islands , while a severe tropical storm . The next day , the storm passed a short distance southwest of Jeju Island offshore South Korea . After entering the Yellow Sea , Fengshen weakened into a tropical depression , and on July 27 the JTWC discontinued advisories , after much of the convection had dissipated . The JMA continued tracking the system , and Fengshen made landfall on China 's Shandong Peninsula late on July 27 . The next day , the depression dissipated over the Bohai Sea . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Before Fengshen affected Japan , airline officials canceled more than 30 flights , and train and bus service was also interrupted . Along the coast of Kyushu , Fengshen washed a freighter onshore and split it in two , which was traveling from New Orleans , Louisiana to Kagoshima Prefecture . Four people were drowned while escaping the broken vessel , while the remaining crew of 19 were rescued . The typhoon produced strong winds and heavy rain in the country . A station in Miyazaki Prefecture reported the highest rainfall in Japan with a total of 717 mm ( 28 @.@ 2 in ) . Most of the precipitation fell in a 24 ‑ hour period , and the heaviest 1 hour total was 52 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) in Taira , Toyama . The highest winds in Japan was 101 km / h ( 63 mph ) recorded in Kōchi Prefecture . The storm left about 8 @,@ 200 homes in Kagoshima Prefecture without power . High rainfall caused at least six mudslides , one of which damaged a county road . A total of 20 homes were damaged in the country , and 200 families were evacuated . High rains damaged 5 @,@ 699 hectares ( 14 @,@ 083 acres ) of crop fields , totaling $ 4 million ( ¥ 475 million 2002 JPY ) . Fengshen killed one person and severely injured another person in the country . 
 The remnants of Fengshen produced heavy rainfall in northeastern China . The storm affected the capital city of Beijing , becoming the first storm to produce significant impact there since Typhoon Rita in 1972 . In a two @-@ day period , a station in the city reported 41 @.@ 4 mm ( 1 @.@ 63 in ) of rainfall . The heaviest rainfall was in Jilin province , where 104 @.@ 9 mm ( 4 @.@ 13 in ) was recorded in <unk> . 
 = Maiden Castle , Cheshire = 
 Maiden Castle is an Iron Age hill fort , one of many fortified hill @-@ top settlements constructed across Britain during the Iron Age , but one of only seven in the county of Cheshire in northern England . The hill fort was probably occupied from its construction in 600 BC until the Roman conquest of Britain in the 1st century AD . At this time the Cornovii tribe are recorded to have occupied parts of the surrounding area but , because they left no distinctive pottery or metalworking , their occupation has not been verified . Since then it has been quarried and used for military exercises . It is protected as a Scheduled Ancient Monument , and is owned by the National Trust . The hill fort is open to visitors , but unrestricted access to the site has resulted in it being classified as " at high risk " from erosion . 
 = = Background = = 
 Hill forts developed in the Late Bronze and Early Iron Age , roughly the start of the first millennium BC . The reason for their emergence in Britain , and their purpose , has been a subject of debate . It has been argued that they could have been military sites constructed in response to invasion from continental Europe , sites built by invaders , or a military reaction to social tensions caused by an increasing population and consequent pressure on agriculture . The dominant view since the 1960s has been that the increasing use of iron led to social changes in Britain . Deposits of iron ore were located in different places to the tin and copper ore necessary to make bronze , and as a result trading patterns shifted and the old elites lost their economic and social status . Power passed into the hands of a new group of people . Archaeologist Barry Cunliffe believes that population increase still played a role and has stated that 
 [ the forts ] provided defensive possibilities for the community at those times when the stress [ of an increasing population ] burst out into open warfare . But I wouldn 't see them as having been built because there was a state of war . They would be functional as defensive strongholds when there were tensions and undoubtedly some of them were attacked and destroyed , but this was not the only , or even the most significant , factor in their construction 
 = = Location = = 
 Although there are over 1 @,@ 300 hill forts in England , they are concentrated in the south of the country , with only seven in Cheshire . There are two groups of hill forts in Cheshire , each with three members , but Maiden Castle is the outlier , about 9 miles ( 14 km ) south @-@ south @-@ west of the southern @-@ most group . Located at grid reference <unk> , Maiden Castle lies on the central ridge that runs north – south through the county , as do all of the hill forts in Cheshire . 
 Maiden Castle sits on a slight promontory which is the highest point of a plateau on Bickerton Hill , 694 ft ( 212 m ) . The ground to the west and north of the hill fort is steeply sloping , making artificial defences unnecessary and providing a commanding view of the Cheshire Plain . To the east of Maiden Castle , the plateau continues for about 1 mile ( 2 km ) and 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 800 m ) wide , where ramparts were constructed in lieu of natural defences . 
 = = Layout = = 
 Maiden Castle has no artificial defences on its northern and western sides because of the naturally steep slope of the hill , but there are two artificial banks , 35 ft ( 11 m ) apart . The banks are similar in dimension , both are 40 ft ( 12 m ) wide , and because the ground they are on slopes , the exterior side of each bank is higher than the side on the inside of the fort ; they are 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) high on the inside of the fort and 7 ft ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) on the exterior face . There is no evidence that Maiden Castle was protected by a ditch along with the banks . The main entrance is on the east side of the fort where the inner bank turns in towards the fort , and while there is a gap in the outer rampart it does not turn in . There may also be two other entrances to the site where the banks meet the cliffs to the north and south ; the outer ditch runs inwards at both ends , possibly indicating an in @-@ turned entrance abutting the edge of the cliff – similar to the entrance at the <unk> hill fort also in Cheshire – or perhaps an attempt to make the banks run flush to the cliff @-@ edge to ensure there were no gaps in the site 's defences . 
 = = History = = 
 Radiocarbon dating indicates that the ramparts defending Maiden Castle were built in around 600 BC . Built from earth and timber , the inner rampart was originally 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) wide , with a revetment of dry stone walling behind the bank , and at least 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) high . The outer bank was originally 25 ft ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) wide and about 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) high . It was built from sand and had a dry stone facing at the front and no revetment behind . The outer bank was later enlarged : the outer face was extended 8 to 10 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 0 m ) away from the fort and the revetment moved . Its height was probably increased to 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) . The defences cover about 1 @.@ 66 acres ( 6 @,@ 700 m2 ) out of the entire 3 acres ( 12 @,@ 000 m2 ) of the Maiden Castle site . According to archaeologist James Forde @-@ Johnston , who conducted a study of the hill forts of Lancashire and Cheshire in 1962 , this was an unusually strong defence for such a small site . Few artefacts have been recovered from the site ; they include a piece of Iron Age pottery . Maiden Castle was probably occupied until the Roman conquest of Britain in 1st century AD , and the outer bank may have been reconstructed around this time . 
 The name Maiden Castle is not unique to the site and occurs in several other places in Britain , such as Maiden Castle in Dorset , and probably means a " fortification that looks impregnable " or one that has never been taken in battle . Despite quarrying in the 17th century and 20th @-@ century military exercises on the site , Maiden Castle survives well . Maiden Castle was excavated between 1932 and 1935 by W. J. Varley , who also undertook excavations at Eddisbury hill fort , as part of his investigation into the origin of Cheshire 's hill forts . Further excavations were undertaken in 1980 – 1981 . The structure was made a Scheduled Ancient Monument in 1995 , giving Maiden Castle protection against unauthorised change . The environment of the hill fort is a mixture of heathland , heather , and bracken . The site is owned by the National Trust and is open to the public . Unrestricted access has led to problems such as erosion . Maiden Castle has been damaged by animal burrows and is designated as " at high risk " due to erosion caused by visitors and the spread of bracken . Five of Cheshire 's seven hill forts have been assessed as being " at high risk " compared to 15 % of North West England 's Scheduled Monuments . 
 = Life Is Peachy = 
 Life Is Peachy is the second studio album by the American nu metal band Korn , released on October 15 , 1996 through Immortal Records and Epic Records . Life is Peachy earned gold on January 8 , 1997 and later certified platinum on December 9 , 1997 . Following the success of their 1994 self @-@ titled debut , Korn earned a second double platinum for the album in the United States , certified by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on November 10 , 1999 . The album debuted and peaked at number three on the Billboard 200 and peaked at number one in New Zealand . 
 The album has 14 tracks , not including the hidden track after " Kill You " . Korn released three singles from the album and each charted on the UK Singles Chart . For the first time , Korn released covers of the songs " Lowrider " by War and " Wicked " by Ice Cube . The album features such themes as social encounters , sex and revenge . The album cover was designed by Martin <unk> and its name is credited to Korn 's bassist Reginald " Fieldy " Arvizu . Life Is Peachy has sold over 6 million copies worldwide to Nielsen SoundScan 2013 . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 Writing for the band 's second album started immediately after touring their self @-@ titled debut . Guitarist Munky described the writing process as , " we didn 't write nothin ' for two years then we had creativity build up , like blue balls of creativity . " Doug Small , author of The Story of Korn ( ISBN <unk> ) , said that " the band 's songwriting method — a sort of collective building process wherein four instrumentalists , with the input of Jonathan [ Davis ] , develop each other 's ideas until they 've created a monster — is truly a group effort . " The album 's lyrics — for the most part — were primarily written by lead singer Jonathan Davis . Drummer David Silveria told Modern Drummer , " somebody will start playing something and the rest of us will work around it and see where it goes . " 
 After playing at a few gigs with Deftones in California , United States , Korn went back to the studio to start recording Life Is Peachy in April 1996 . Korn asked Ross Robinson to produce , and wanted to begin recording at Indigo Ranch , mostly because their first album had been recorded there and was a success . The quick process was accompanied by drinking and partying . When Davis recorded , he preferred several other people be in the recording studio with him . 
 Jason Arnopp , author of Slipknot : Inside the Sickness , Behind the Masks ( ISBN <unk> ) , along with Doug Small , insisted the album was rushed when it was put together . Silveria explained , " We went in really fresh , and we wanted to get it done quickly to capture that moment . So it was probably about sixty percent knowing what I was going to play and forty percent just playing whatever came to mind at that moment , It ended up really good , and it has a kind of energy I probably wouldn 't have gotten if I 'd worked everything out beforehand . " Korn 's bassist Reginald " Fieldy " Arvizu said , " We wanted that same energy and inspiration we found up in the Malibu Hills . " 
 Jonathan Davis said regarding the writing of the album " Right after we got done touring with Ozzy Osbourne , Ross [ Robinson ] hooked up with us . We went into a rehearsal studio and started writing . It was faster and thrashier . It was us reacting the vibe that we had to hurry up and get this done . We thought , " Let 's do something great , but let 's not take a year on it . " While James " Munky " Shaffer collaborated " Some of the songs and riffs from the first record had been lingering around for years . When it was time to write Life Is Peachy , we went back into the rehearsal studio and we wanted to take the elements that the fans liked and we liked about Korn and elaborate on some of those like Jonathan freaking out . " Twist " came to life . There was that dissonant guitar playing . There was more of a punk rock feel and attitude that the band had . I think a lot of that came from touring so much and the energy of the crowds . We wanted to create a really angry album . " 
 = = Booklet = = 
 Korn 's bassist Reginald " Fieldy " Arvizu came up with the title Life Is Peachy . The name came from Fieldy 's Pee Chee folder . Fieldy often put " Life Is " in front of the brand name , which would humor him . Fieldy said , " I used to doodle all over it [ the file folder ] . I drew long hair on the character and put guitars in their hands . I used to sketch stuff all the time . I eventually knew my scribbles might someday pay off . I thought that visual would make a really cool album cover . " Korn contacted the Pee Chee file folder company and asked for permission to use the file folder 's image for an album cover , offering twenty thousand dollars ( $ 20 @,@ 000 ) , resulting in the company turning the offer down . The name Life Is Peachy was agreed by band members to be a " great " name for the album , and kept the name but didn 't add Fieldy 's file folder cover . 
 The front cover of Life Is Peachy depicts a boy looking in the mirror , seeing a much larger person behind him . The photo was taken by Martin <unk> . The design and concept were by Scott <unk> . Other pictures in the booklet were taken by Stephen Stickler . Doug Small said that it " continued the threatened child theme as depicted on Korn 's artwork . " The cover is mostly black and white , with a little boy , hair combed , straightening his tie in a gilt mirror ; behind him looms a larger , shadowed presence . " Life Is Peachy is , to date , the only album by Korn to feature their name spelled in a different font . 
 The booklet , along with every other album by Korn , does not feature printed lyrics to the songs . The band has explained that the reason the booklets do not feature this is because he believes fans should not rely on printed lyrics because it limits the experience in listening to the music . As Davis told MTV 's Serena Altschul , " I think music is something that every individual has their own meaning to the song . They can come up with whatever the hell I 'm saying and that 's the beauty of it and that 's what I wanna keep there . " 
 = = Touring and promotion = = 
 Korn began touring in the Sick of It All Tour , beginning on January 21 , 1995 , and ending in March 1995 . Following the Sick of It All Tour , Korn joined the Danzig 4 Tour , including Danzig and Marilyn Manson . The tour lasted 3 months and was preceded with the group touring with Megadeth , where they played to crowds of thirty @-@ five @-@ hundred to five thousand . They toured with Megadeth , Fear Factory , and Flotsam and Jetsam . All of this happened in the summer of 1995 . Lead vocalist Jonathan Davis introduced the bagpipes while performing live ( however many people there did not like this ) . 
 Korn began touring in Europe during September 1995 . One of Korn 's first concert dates was in Nottingham . After the performance , there was conflict between Korn 's bassist Fieldy and someone from " tech , " resulting in the airport prohibiting them from boarding the plane . From 1995 to 1997 , Korn toured with Ozzy Osbourne , Sugar Ray , Cradle of Thorns , Incubus , Life of Agony , Metallica , and others . Korn released a promotional disc in 1997 called Life Is Peachy Tour Sampler , with Incubus and The Urge . The album featured 3 tracks , " Chi " ( live ) by Korn , " All Washed Up " ( live ) by The Urge , and " <unk> " ( live ) by Incubus . The promo was released after Life Is Peachy , and lasts for twelve minutes and seventeen seconds . Korn toured solo in 1997 , and headlined at often sold out shows . Limp Bizkit also toured with Korn to promote Life Is Peachy . In 1997 , Korn toured in the Lollapalooza summer tour . They toured with Tool , Snoop Dogg , Jane 's Addiction , Prodigy , and others . 
 On July 18 , not even a month into the tour , the group was forced to cancel the remainder of their Lollapalooza appearances due to guitarist James " Munky " Shaffer recent diagnosis with viral meningitis . Jonathan Davis issued a written statement about Shaffer 's illness saying , " We love our fans . This is the last thing we want to do , but it 's the only decision to make at this time . It just doesn 't feel right without [ Shaffer ] . " The statement also acknowledged fans that " there is no suitable replacement for [ Shaffer ] during his recuperation . " 
 Aside from touring , Korn also released three singles following the album 's release . " No Place to Hide " was the album 's first single . The single features the song " Proud " , a song that was previously unreleased . Other versions include both original and remixed versions of songs featured on Korn . The song " A.D.I.D.A.S. " was released as a single on March 4 , 1997 . The song 's music video was directed by Joseph Kahn . Reginald " Fieldy " Arvizu said that " It was one of the hardest videos we ever made because we all had to lie still on cold metal slabs for hours , pretending to be dead . We wore dirty blue contacts in our eyes that made us partially blind while they were in . " 
 = = Music and lyrical themes = = 
 Life Is Peachy opens with the forty @-@ nine second prelude " Twist " , which is made up of improvised scat singing done by Jonathan . Doug Small described the singing as " spitting out the twisted rantings of a madman " , and said that it was fit for the album 's introduction . An a cappella version of " Twist " is included as a hidden track after " Kill You " . " A.D.I.D.A.S. " is an Acronym for " All Day I Dream About Sex " . " Kill You " is about Jonathan Davis ' ex @-@ stepmother . 
 Considered nu metal , the album features hip hop elements with James " Munky " Shaffer recalling " We were listening to a lot of hip hop , I was probably listening to a lot of Mr. Bungle , hip hop like early Outkast and The Pharcyde , Sepultura records , and Rage Against the Machine , just to name a few . " The band would further explore hip hop on their next album Follow the Leader . 
 Q Magazine said that the album was both harsh and hard , and Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic said that the album 's rhythms were " straight out of underground black metal , " while also noting that it " enhanced their metallic influences . " With the same band @-@ line up as their previous album , the band created an album considered to be darker than their debut album . Entertainment Weekly considered the album to be of interest to " mental @-@ health professionals . " Jon Pareles stated that the album 's themes characterize Korn being " Mad at Everybody , Including Themselves " . iTunes said Life Is Peachy was " a barrage of throttling , detuned guitar aggression that erupts from the bottom like molten lava . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Life Is Peachy received mixed reviews from critics . Q Magazine said the album is " <unk> and harder than their groundbreaking debut . " AllMusic said " Korn add enough elements of alternative rock song structure to make the music accessible to the masses , and their songwriting has continued to improve . " iTunes commented that " Regardless of the musical textures , Life Is Peachy is unified in its focus . " Entertainment Weekly said that the album left the " impression that frontman Jonathan Davis is turning his well @-@ publicized childhood traumas into a cheap marketing device " . They gave it a C- and said that it " may be of interest to mental @-@ health professionals . " 
 " No Place to Hide " earned the band a second Grammy nomination in the Best Metal Performance category in 1998 . The single peaked at number twenty @-@ six on the UK Singles Chart . The album 's second single , " A.D.I.D.A.S. " , peaked at number twenty @-@ two on the UK Singles Chart , while also making an appearance at number forty @-@ five in Australia . " Good God " , the album 's third and final single , peaked at number twenty @-@ five on UK Singles Chart , and number eighty @-@ one on the ARIA Charts . The album peaked at number one in New Zealand . The album also peaked at number three on the Billboard 200 , and number thirty @-@ two on the UK Albums Chart . <unk> from Metal Storm Webzine said that Life Is Peachy is Korn 's best album . At the 1997 Kerrang ! Awards Life Is Peachy won the " Best Album " award . Life Is Peachy and Korn 's self @-@ titled album have been labelled as " landmarks " in alternative metal music . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Korn unless otherwise noted . 
 The song " Kill You " ends at 5 : 02 . After two minutes and 33 seconds of silence a brief reprisal of " Twist " in a capella form called " Twist A Capella " , starts . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Bombardment of Salé = 
 The Bombardment of Salé was a naval attack against the Moroccan city of Salé that took place between 26 and 27 November 1851 , in response to the looting of a French cargo ship by residents of the city . After seven hours of fighting , the Moroccan artillery suffered severe damage , and the French bombarded the city through the night , damaging the city 's infrastructure and the Great Mosque of Salé . 
 French losses were minimal , with only four dead and 18 wounded . Between 18 and 22 Moroccans died , two @-@ thirds of whom were civilians . The French forces withdrew , and both sides claimed victory . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the French conquest of Algeria , Abdelkader El <unk> declared war against France , and requested assistance from Sultan Abd al @-@ Rahman of Morocco . When the Sultan responded favorably , it triggered the Franco @-@ Moroccan War . France sent warships to bombard Tangier on 6 August 1844 , destroying large parts of the city and its defenses . The French then bombarded Essaouira , and occupied the Iles <unk> . After the French army defeated the Moroccan cavalry at the Battle of <unk> on 14 August 1844 , Sultan Abd al @-@ Rahman asked for peace with France , leading to the signing of the Treaty of Tangier on 10 September 1844 . Morocco 's defeat caused a revolt in Rabat ; in Salé , the city 's nobility , known as the Sharif , sent a letter to the Sultan complaining about the lack of weapons and ammunition in the city . 
 Meanwhile , the French government 's anger against Morocco was increasing . A series of incidents in October 1849 damaged relations between both countries ; a series of assassinations directed at the French frontier had occurred , and the French Consul had requested the dismissal of Pacha <unk> , who was believed to have caused these issues . From 1845 to 1851 , Morocco had a serious agricultural crisis caused by a drought , resulting in crop failure . The people of Morocco were suffering as the price of wheat and barley reached unprecedented heights . In Salé , many people were starving , and the agricultural crisis and anger towards France ultimately led to the bombardment of Salé . 
 = = Preliminaries = = 
 On 1 April 1851 , a French cargo ship carrying 98 tons of goods from Gibraltar to Rabat capsized near the coast of Salé . A few tons of goods were rescued , and were stored in the city for safekeeping . Salé turned out to be less than safe , however ; by the next day , hundreds of townspeople were scavenging and stealing the goods . The thieves were thwarted by <unk> <unk> , but only temporarily . By the end of the raids , the French had lost 11 @,@ 391 franc <unk> worth of goods . 
 French diplomat Nicolas Prosper <unk> reported the situation in Salé to the French , and accused the people in the city of piracy . <unk> recommended sending military forces to the city ; the French government obliged . 
 On 10 November 1851 , the French Secretary of the Navy tasked Louis Dubourdieu with the execution of the action against Salé , and five vessels were assigned to him in this regard : Henri IV ( armed with 100 cannons and captained by Louis Henri de Gueydon ) , the Sané ( 14 cannons ) , the Gomer ( 14 cannons ) , the Narval ( 4 cannons ) , and the Caton ( 6 cannons ) . The fleet gathered in Cádiz on 19 November , and after being supplied with food and coal , sailed for Salé on 21 November . 
 = = Bombardment = = 
 On 24 November , some of the French ships traveled to Tangier , where they picked up Consul Julius <unk> and his secretary , <unk> , on Narval . Later that evening , Caton reached Salé and offered safe passage to Rabat for the British consul Elton and his family , in anticipation of the bombardment of the city . The following day , at 11 : 00 a.m. , Caton anchored between the cities of Rabat and Salé . Its commander demanded an apology over the thefts and raids and immediate repayment for the stolen goods , under threat of bombardment . The rais in the ports of both cities promised to answer to the French demands within three hours . Two hours later , all of the French ships had reached the mouth of the Bou Regreg , between Rabat and Salé . 
 The French crews of Henri IV received a telegraph from Admiral de Gueydon , suggesting that the bombardment of the city would begin soon , which the crews welcomed with enthusiasm . By then , a large crowd of people in Rabat and Salé had gathered to observe the French ships after they were spotted by Moroccan artillery operators . Admiral de Gueydon decided against starting the bombardment until consul Elton was aboard Caton ; the consul did not come aboard the ship until four hours later . At dawn on 26 November though , the British steamer Janus joined Caton , and took the consul as its passenger . 
 The Moroccan soldiers in both Rabat and Salé prepared to repel the French attack , and armed themselves with artillery . On the French side , Sané had moved to the fort at the entrance to the Bou Regreg river ; Henri IV was a short distance from the Moroccan batteries north of Salé . Gomer moved to a suitable position to attack , and both Narval and Caton would provide logistical support . 
 The French opened fire on the forts of Salé at 10 : 00 a.m. , and the Moroccans retaliated instantly with forty batteries of artillery weapons . An hour into the confrontation , the batteries in Salé were destroyed , and the artillery in Rabat were damaged to a level that they became almost useless . The French fire intensified , but at 3 : 30 p.m. , the damaged batteries were removed from the city by Moroccan forces ; however , resistance did not stop until 5 : 00 p.m. Sané and Gomer , lacking for ammunition , withdrew from the battle , while Henri IV continued its barrage on the city until 7 : 00 a.m. the next morning . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The following day , Dubourdieu sent a report to the Minister of War describing the French losses . Henri IV took several hits , with 1 dead and 9 wounded . The Sané suffered more damage than the Gomer , but neither was seriously damaged . Three men were killed on the Sané , and nine were wounded . 
 The damage to Salé was considerable ; a wall from the Almohad Caliphate was severely damaged , and the Great Mosque of Salé was struck by six cannonballs . Several homes were destroyed , and many were burnt down . Between 12 and 15 civilians were killed , along with six to seven soldiers . Tactically , the battle was a victory for France . In order to prevent Tangier from receiving a similar bombardment , Morocco agreed to pay 100 @,@ 000 francs to the French on 29 November 1851 . 
 Politically , however , the battle is considered a failure for France . Initially , France had desired a revolt against the governor of Salé to force repayment and avoid destruction of the city , but this did not occur . The French demanded that those who killed Christians in the city be sentenced to death , and that thieves have their hands cut off ; however , the governor of Salé simply banished these people from the city . 
 Following this confrontation , diplomatic relations between France and Morocco ended for several months , until a French diplomatic mission returned in 1852 . After the bombardment , Dubourdieu was promoted to Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor , and then to vice @-@ admiral in February 1852 . 
 = The Vampires of Venice = 
 " The Vampires of Venice " is the sixth episode in the fifth series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who , which was broadcast on 8 May 2010 on BBC One . It was written by Toby Whithouse , who previously wrote " School Reunion " , and was directed by first @-@ time Doctor Who director Jonny Campbell . 
 Following from the end of " Flesh and Stone " where his companion Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) had kissed him , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) picks up Amy 's fiancé Rory ( Arthur Darvill ) and takes the two on a romantic trip to Venice in 1580 . There they are intrigued by a girls ' school whose students appear to be vampires and discover that they are really alien refugees in disguise , who plot to make Venice their new home . 
 The episode replaced a different script Whithouse had planned to write , and was designed to be a romantic episode that could also be a good introduction to the show . Whithouse chose the setting to be Venice , and vampires soon entered the plot as he felt they belonged in the setting . The episode was filmed in Trogir , Croatia in late 2009 , with the old @-@ fashioned village portraying Venice . The episode was seen by 7 @.@ 68 million viewers in the UK and received an Appreciation Index of 86 . The episode received mixed reviews from critics , who praised the comedy , production design , and acting of guests Helen McCrory and Alex Price , but thought that the plot elements were somewhat similar to a couple of other recent episodes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The Doctor , believing Amy 's attraction to him is due to the stress from travel , gatecrashes her fiancé Rory 's stag party and invites the two of them on a romantic trip courtesy of the TARDIS . They land in Venice in 1580 and soon find trouble . The city 's patron , Signora Rosanna Calvierri , claims that the Black Plague runs rampant outside of Venice . The Doctor says this is false and that it appears she is using the plague as an excuse to seal off the city . While investigating they encounter Guido , a boat @-@ builder whose daughter Isabella hasn 't contacted him since enrolling in Signora Calvierri 's school for girls . 
 Amy devises a plan to place herself inside the school with the help of Rory and The Doctor 's psychic paper . Amy manages to unlock a gate and allow the others in , but in doing so is captured and taken to a chamber . The Doctor and Rory come to believe the women are being converted into vampires , and discover a box containing a dead figure . Amy kicks at Signora Calvierri 's side and disrupts a device that is hiding her true alien form . They begin converting Amy into one of them when Isabella , who has yet to be fully converted , frees Amy and they escape . Isabella hesitates while escaping because she can no longer tolerate direct sunlight and is pulled back inside while the door closes . The Doctor tries to open the door but he gets shocked by electricity and collapses . Isabella is later thrown into a canal by Signora Calvierri and eaten by something that lives underwater . 
 The Doctor goes back inside to question Signora Calvierri who confirms that she and the others are from the planet <unk> , a race of aquatic beings with vampire @-@ like tendencies . She and the others landed on Earth after seeing the cracks in the universe . Calvierri and her son Francesco intend to sink the city into the water and convert humans into " Sisters of the Water " in order to continue their race . When the Doctor returns to Guido 's home to regroup with Amy and Rory , Signora Calvierri sends her transformed girls to attack them . Guido sacrifices himself for the others by blowing up several kegs of gunpowder that kill him and the girls . Signora Calvierri activates a device on a tower that begins to create the earthquakes and floods that will sink Venice . While Amy and Rory face and defeat Francesco , the Doctor climbs the tower and stops the device in time . The last of her kind , Signora Calvierri throws herself into the canal to be eaten , but not before tormenting the Doctor by reminding him that he is now responsible for the extinction of two species : her own , and the Time Lords . 
 In the aftermath of the incident , Amy and the Doctor invite Rory to continue traveling with them , but as the Doctor and Rory are about to enter the TARDIS , everything falls silent . Unnerved , the Doctor remembers Signora Calvierri 's words : " We saw silence , and the end of all things ... " 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 Intending to produce his psychic paper during the episode , the Eleventh Doctor accidentally produces a library card with a photograph of the First Doctor ( William Hartnell ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Writer Toby Whithouse originally planned to write a different episode set in " some sort of labyrinth " , but after the idea had been developed for a while executive producers Steven Moffat and Piers Wenger thought that it was too similar to other episodes in the series , and asked him to write something else , while Whithouse 's original idea was pushed to the next series ( The God Complex ) . He was asked to write " a big bold romantic episode " which would also serve as a " sort of reboot episode " and a good introduction to Doctor Who . Whithouse was asked to set it " anywhere in the world " that was romantic , and he chose Venice , which he called " one of my favourite places in the world " . Whithouse believed that the vampires fit into the setting . Whithouse had a positive experience writing the episode , reflecting that " writing on the show is a delight and a pleasure " . As he is executive producer of Being Human , he was pleased he only had to write the episode and not worry about the other aspects of production . The major plot point of " sinking Venice " was conceived as Whithouse needed to use the identity of the location and it was a very aquatic city , and Venice was " constantly fighting " enemies in its history but this time it proved to be its own worst enemy . 
 The opening scene , which detailed Isabella 's entrance to the school and the foreboding danger that came with it , was described as " classic " Doctor Who by Whithouse as it contained a " victim coming into a trap " . Isabella 's scream at the end of the scene originally went into the title sequence ; however , director Jonny Campbell thought that the next two scenes had " soft endings " that would not work well right after each other . As a result , the title sequence was moved to after the scene of the Doctor crashing Rory 's stag party , which Whithouse described as a " fun scene " and a unique opening to the titles . Whithouse also wanted to emphasise the amount of danger the Doctor puts people in , which is pointed out by Rory in the episode . He believed that the companions over time developed the same mentality as the Doctor in running towards the danger , and so Rory was a great opportunity to question that . Whithouse also wanted a " comic thread " to " dilute " the plot and character developments . He also noted that it was difficult to capture Guido 's " tragic " character in the running time . The episode also gives a " <unk> " reference by showing a picture of the Doctor 's first incarnation on his library card . The references to " silence " in the episode are shown as flashbacks in the episode " Day of the Moon " of the next series , suggesting it was foreshadowing to the enemy of the Silence which were the focus of that episode . 
 The script was originally too long , and as a result many sequences had to be cut , some even after they had been filmed . These included a fight scene with the Doctor and Rosanna 's steward ( Simon Gregor ) , a longer fight sequence between Rory and Francesco , and some dialogue between the Doctor and Amy following the climax . In the original script , Amy and Rory cornered Francesco after suspecting him of killing a villager and Francesco climbed up the wall . Whithouse thought this would be a relatively easy stunt , but was told it would be too hard to accomplish and Whithouse revised it to when Francesco simply runs away . When discussing the script with Whithouse , Helen McCrory , who portrayed Rosanna , thought that she should hurt Amy at some point and it was added that she bites Amy while she is in the chamber . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 The read @-@ through of " The Vampires of Venice " took place on 23 November 2009 . It is the first Doctor Who episode to be directed by Campbell and the first co @-@ produced by Patrick <unk> . The episode was filmed in the fifth production block with " Vincent and the Doctor " . Due to the fact it would take time to cover up all the modern shops found in present @-@ day Venice , the episode was filmed in the coastal town of Trogir , Croatia in late 2009 . The Venetians had actually colonised Trogir , and the city bears much historical architecture , including some that was influenced by Venice . The interior of the Calvierri house was filmed at Atlantic College , Caerphilly Castle , Castell Coch , and the Town Hall of Trogir , while the <unk> Fawr Manor , a 16th @-@ century manor house near Cardiff , was used as Guido 's home . The production team incorporated the Calvierri crest into as many locations as possible and the art department designed a " fish gargoyle " for the tower of the Calvierri house . A church tower in Trogir was used for the climax ; this scene was challenging to film because of the stunts for Smith and a stunt double . The roof of the tower was constructed in the studio and some of the scene was filmed there in front of a greenscreen . 
 The gondolas were filmed in the moat on Caerphilly Castle and inserted with CGI . Locals were used in the marketplace , including a woman who had passed by the filming site with her goat . A small crew did go to Venice to take wide shots of the buildings that bordered the water but did not have walkways as they did in Trogir . Campbell wanted to incorporate everything he loved about Venice , including church bells and narrow alleyways . Though Trogir was on the coast , it did not have internal waterways , so the production team found they could fill a square on the street below the balcony where the characters were with computer generated water and make it part of the Grand Canal . The chamber in which the girls were taken to be turned into the <unk> was bathed in a green light to suggest alien technology and also ease the brief glimpse of Rosanna 's true form . The cinematographer accomplished this despite the low ceilings . Parts of this scene were cut due to censorship issues for being " too scary " . 
 Several aspects of the episode had to be compromised due to budget constraints . The true form of the aliens could only be shown for a few seconds each as it was very expensive to do , and these shots were spread throughout the episode . In the original script a big monster rose out of the water in Isabella 's death scene , but this would have been too expensive and Moffat was forced to ask Whithouse to make it " invisible " . Many of the costumes in the episode were taken from artwork from the 15th and 16th centuries . This included veils that women wore , which were used for the vampire girls . Guido trades clothes with Rory when Rory must disguise himself as a Venetian to enter Amy into the school ; this was an idea of Moffat 's which Whithouse was against as he thought Guido was a " tragic character " , but he eventually thought the sight of the character in Rory 's stag party T @-@ shirt was funny . McCrory 's costume was designed to be similar to her alien creature to make the transition smooth . McCrory was coached to move like a fish , which she pursued diligently . Each pair of teeth for the vampires was unique and moulded to their mouths . They were hard to speak with and Alex Price 's lines were re @-@ voiced , though he commented he got " quite good " at speaking with them . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Vampires of Venice " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 8 May 2010 . Due to an extended episode of Over the Rainbow which was shown afterwards , the episode aired at 6 : 00 p.m. , the earliest start time for a Doctor Who episode since the series was revived in 2005 . Perhaps due to this , the episode received the lowest overnight figures of the series at time of broadcast : 6 @.@ 17 million on BBC One and simulcast BBC HD . When final consolidated ratings were calculated , it was shown that the episode had been watched by a total of 7 @.@ 68 viewers , coming in fifth place on BBC One for the week . The episode received an Appreciation Index of 86 , considered " excellent " . 
 " The Vampires of Venice " was released in Region 2 on DVD and Blu @-@ ray with the preceding episodes " The Time of Angels " and " Flesh and Stone " on 5 July 2010 . It was then re @-@ released as part of the Complete Fifth Series boxset on 8 November 2010 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received mixed reviews . Daniel Martin , writing for The Guardian on guardian.co.uk , described it as " beautifully shot " and went on to write : " the way every part of the vampire mythos was explained away by Who pseudo @-@ science was delightful ; the stand @-@ off between the Doctor and Rosanna was beautifully played ; the dialogue as cracking as you 'd expect from Whithouse ... and the climactic shot of the Doctor scaling the tower in the rain was just the correct level of broad brushstroke " . SFX reviewer David Bradley also reacted positively , giving the episode four out of five stars . He assessed it as " better structured , funnier and more absorbing " than the previous single episode " Victory of the Daleks " and praised the comedy and acting of Alex Price . However , he thought the " expensive @-@ looking locations are let down by shonky special effects " . 
 Gavin Fuller gave the episode a negative review in The Daily Telegraph , calling it " highly disappointing " and " a tragically wasted opportunity . " He criticised the writing and plot for " sheer <unk> " , noting that the opening scene was " similar in concept " to Whithouse 's previous Doctor Who episode " School Reunion " and thought the " aliens @-@ posing @-@ as @-@ humans idea " was taken from that script as well . He went on to criticise Lucian <unk> as Guido as he " seemed to be taken straight out of Othello " , negatively compared the love triangle between the Doctor , Amy and Rory to the storyline with previous characters Rose and Mickey , and thought the ending was too similar to " The Idiot 's Lantern " and " Evolution of the Daleks " . 
 Patrick Mulkern , writing for the Radio Times , echoed Fuller 's sentiments in his review , saying " I must admit I yawn at aliens disguised as humans . We 've seen it so many times now " and noted that Whithouse had used the concept in " School Reunion " and his Torchwood episode " Greeks Bearing Gifts " . However , he also thought that " the script delivers lots of heroics and funny moments for the Doctor , Amy and Rory " , and he praised the " terrific cast " , describing Helen McCrory as " majestic " . IGN 's Matt Wales rated " The Vampires of Venice " 7 out of 10 , saying that it " had plenty of standout moments , even if it didn 't quite manage to come together to form a completely satisfying whole " . He praised the comedy between Amy and Rory and McCrory 's acting , as well as the location shots and Croatia and thought " the sci @-@ fi retcon of classic vampire phenomenon was particularly clever " , believing that the aliens went beyond two @-@ dimensional . However , he agreed with Fuller and Mulkern that " its single biggest problem was one of over @-@ familiarity " , with many misplaced alien races having featured before . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Vampires of Venice " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Like a Prayer ( song ) = 
 " Like a Prayer " is a song by American singer Madonna , from her studio album of the same name . It was released by Sire Records as the lead single from the album on March 3 , 1989 . Written and produced by Madonna and Patrick Leonard , " Like a Prayer " denoted a more artistic and personal approach to songwriting for Madonna , who felt she needed to cater more to her adult audience . 
 " Like a Prayer " is a pop rock song with elements of gospel music . A choir provides background vocals that heighten the song 's spiritual nature , and a rock guitar keeps the music dark and mysterious . Madonna introduced liturgical words in the lyrics — inspired by her Catholic upbringing — but changed the context in which they were used . They have dual meanings of sexual innuendo and religion . " Like a Prayer " was acclaimed by critics , and was a commercial success . It was Madonna 's seventh number @-@ one single on the United States ' Billboard Hot 100 , and topped the singles charts in Australia , Canada , Denmark , Finland , Ireland , Italy , New Zealand , Norway , Sweden , the United Kingdom and other countries . 
 The music video , directed by Mary Lambert , portrays Madonna as a witness to a murder of a white girl by white supremacists . While a black man is arrested for the murder , Madonna hides in a church for safety seeking strength to go forth as a witness . The clip depicts Catholic symbols such as stigmata , Ku Klux Klan @-@ style cross burning , and a dream about kissing a black saint . After its release , the Vatican condemned the video , while family and religious groups protested its broadcast . They boycotted products by soft drink manufacturer Pepsi , which used the song for a commercial . Madonna 's contract with Pepsi was then canceled , although she was allowed to retain her initial fee . 
 The song has been featured on four of Madonna 's concert tours , most recently the Rebel Heart Tour in 2015 . " Like a Prayer " has been covered by many artists . The song is noted for the mayhem surrounding the music video , and the different interpretations of its content , leading to discussions among music and film scholars . Alongside its respective album , " Like a Prayer " has been considered a turning point in Madonna 's career , as she began to be viewed as an efficient businesswoman — someone who knew how to sell a concept . 
 = = Background = = 
 1988 was a quiet year on the recording front for Madonna . Following the critical and commercial failure of her 1987 film Who 's That Girl , she acted in the Broadway production Speed @-@ the @-@ Plow . However , unfavorable reviews once again caused her discomfort . Her marriage to actor Sean Penn ended and the couple filed for divorce in January 1989 . Madonna turned 30 , the age at which her mother had died , and thus the singer experienced more emotional turmoil . She commented for the May 1989 issue of Interview that her Catholic upbringing struck a feeling of guilt in her all the time : 
 Because in Catholicism you are a born sinner and you 're a sinner all your life . No matter how you try to get away from it , the sin is within you all the time . It was this fear that haunted me ; it taunted and pained me every moment . My music was probably the only distraction I had . 
 But she understood that as she was growing up , so was her core audience . Feeling the need to attempt something different , Madonna wanted the sound of her new album to indicate what could be popular in the music world . She had certain personal matters on her mind that she thought could be the musical direction of the album . For lyrical ideas of the title track , she chose topics that until then had been personal meditations never to be shared with the general public . <unk> , she sifted through her personal journals and diaries , and began considering her options . She recalled , " What was it I wanted to say ? I wanted the album and the song to speak to things on my mind . It was a complex time in my life . " 
 = = Development = = 
 As Madonna considered her alternatives , producers Patrick Leonard and Stephen Bray experimented with instrumental tracks and musical ideas for her consideration . Both of them wanted to bring their unique style to the project , and they developed completely different music for the title track . Eventually , Madonna felt that the music presented to her by Leonard was more interesting , and she started to work with him . Together they wrote and produced the title track , naming it " Like a Prayer " ; it was the first song developed for the Like a Prayer album . Once Madonna had conceptualized the way she would interpose her ideas with the music , she wrote the song in about three hours . She described " Like a Prayer " as the song of a passionate young girl " so in love with God that it is almost as though He were the male figure in her life . " 
 Madonna 's further inspiration for writing the title song came from the Catholic belief of transubstantiation . She believed that the wine and wafer , which Catholics believe become the Body of Christ during Mass , have transformative power and every word in the prayer has its precise meaning . For Madonna , " Like a Prayer " similarly appeared to carry its own transformative power . While writing the lyrics , Madonna introduced liturgical words but changed the context in which they were added for a dual meaning . She wanted the song to have superficial pop lyrics about sexuality and religion , but a different meaning underneath which she believed could provoke a reaction from her listeners . In author J. Randy Taraborrelli 's book Madonna : An Intimate Biography , Leonard explained that he was not comfortable with the lyrics and the sexual innuendos present in it . He gave the example of the first verse for " Like a Prayer " which goes " When you call my name , It 's like a little prayer , I 'm down on my knees , I wanna take you there . " Leonard understood that the dual meaning of the lines referred to someone performing fellatio . He was aghast and requested that Madonna change the line , but she was adamant about keeping it . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Once Madonna and Leonard finished writing the lyrics of " Like a Prayer " , they decided to record it alongside a choir at the end of 1988 . He wanted to have a quick recording session for the song , as he believed that not much work would be needed for it . Madonna and Leonard met with musician Andraé Crouch and a member of his management team / vocalist Roberto Noriega and signed his choir as one of the background vocalists . Since Crouch was the leader of the Los Angeles Church of God choir , he researched the lyrics of the song , as he wanted to " find out what the intention of the song might be . We 're very particular in choosing what we work with , and we liked what we heard . " At Jonny Yuma recording studio , Crouch got his choir together and explained to them what they needed to do during the recording session . He had listened to the demo of " Like a Prayer " in his car , and directed his choir according to his own interpretations of the music . The choir was recorded separately , and Leonard wanted it to be added during post @-@ production of the song . 
 Recording took more time than usual since Madonna and Leonard fought " tooth and nail " according to O 'Brien , the reason being Madonna wanting to prove everybody that her second time as a record producer was not a fluke . Leonard worked on the chord changes for the verses and the chorus . He hired guitarist Bruce Gaitsch and bass guitar player Guy Pratt as musicians for " Like a Prayer " . Pratt had in turn hired some additional drummers who were supposed to reach Jonny Yuma in the morning . However , the person cancelled at the last minute , which irritated Madonna greatly , and she started shouting and swearing profusely at Leonard . Pratt did not end up being fired , but as recording started for " Like a Prayer " , he realized that Madonna would not forgive him easily ; she called him at late nights for his opinion , and urgently asking him to come to the recording studio , only to dismiss him . In the meantime , Leonard hired British drum and guitar players such as Chester <unk> , David Williams and Dann Huff . He commented that the choice was deliberate since he was a fan of British rock , and wanted that kind of attitude and quirkiness of the musicians in " Like a Prayer " , as well as the other songs of the album . Madonna had her own opinion of how the different musical instruments should be played to achieve the sound that she envisioned . 
 Pratt recalled that after the middle chorus of the song was recorded , Madonna notified the musicians of some changes in the production . She wanted drummer Jonathan Moffet to " do less of the high @-@ hat in the middle eight , and more of a fill towards the end . Guy , I want duck eggs [ <unk> ] on the end , and Chester , bring in your guitar on the second verse . " The team ran through her instructions once more , and did a final take with vocals and one with the string arrangements . Gaitsch heard Madonna telling Leonard that " Like a Prayer " could not be improved further , and that the recording was finished . Leonard then gave the song to Bill Bottrell for the mixing process . As the mixing was nearing completion , Leonard felt that the bongos and the Latin Percussion would sound really mismatched , if Crouch 's choir was to be added afterwards ; hence , he removed them . Junior Vasquez remixed the 12 " version of the track , turning the church capella inside out and overlaying it with Fast Eddie 's single " Let 's Go " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Like a Prayer " is a pop rock song that incorporates elements of gospel and funk music . According to the sheet music from Alfred Publishing , it was composed using common time in the key of D minor , with a moderate tempo of 120 beats per minute . Madonna 's vocals range from the lower octave of A3 to the two @-@ lined higher note of F5 . " Like a Prayer " starts with a Dm – C / D – Gm / D – Dm chord progression in the opening chorus , and a Dm – C / E – C7 – B ♭ – F / A sequence in the verses . The song begins with the sound of heavy rock guitar that is suddenly cut off after a few seconds , and replaced with the choir and the sound of an organ . Madonna sings the opening lines alongside the light sound of percussion , as drums start during the first verse . The percussion and the choir sound are added interchangeably between the verses and the bridges , until the second chorus . At this point the guitars start flickering from left to right , accompanied by a bubbling sequenced bassline . 
 Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , commented that " Like a Prayer " was the most complex track that Madonna had ever attempted . According to him , the complexity builds up more after the second chorus , in which the choir fully supports Madonna 's vocals and she re @-@ utters the opening lines , but this time accompanied by a synthesizer and drum beats . As Madonna sings the lines " Just like a prayer , your voice can take me there , Just like , a muse to me , You 're a mystery " , an R & B @-@ influenced voice backs her up along with the choir . The song ends with a final repetition of the chorus and the singing of the choir gradually fading out . 
 Taraborrelli noted in Madonna : An Intimate Biography that the lyrics of the song consist of " a series of button @-@ pushing anomalies " . With Madonna 's inclusion of double entendres in the lyrics , " Like a Prayer " refers to both the spiritual and the carnal . Taraborrelli felt that the song sounds religious , but with an undertone of sexual tension . This was achieved by the gospel choir , whose voice heightens the song 's spiritual nature , while the rock guitar sounds keep it dark and mysterious . Author Lucy O 'Brien explained how the song 's lyrics describe Madonna receiving a vocation from God : " Madonna is unashamedly her mother 's daughter — kneeling alone in private devotion , contemplating God 's mystery . She sings of being chosen , of having a calling . " The album version features bass guitar played by Guy Pratt doubled by an analogue Minimoog bass synthesizer , while the 7 " version has a different bass part played by Randy Jackson . " Like a Prayer " was also remixed by Shep Pettibone for the 12 " single of the song ; a re @-@ edited version of Pettibone 's mix is featured on Madonna 's 1990 compilation album The Immaculate Collection . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Following the release of " Like a Prayer " on March 3 , 1989 , it received widespread acclaim from critics and biographers . Taraborrelli commented that the track " deserved every bit of the curiosity it generated . While being devilishly danceable , the song also shows Madonna 's uncanny ability to inspire strong , conflicting emotions during the course of a single song , leaving the listener scratching his head for answers — and craving for more . " Stephen Holden from The New York Times , while writing about Madonna 's re @-@ invention of her image , observed how Madonna 's sound had changed from the " simple blaring dance @-@ pop to the rich , fully rounded pop of ' Like a Prayer ' " . O 'Brien felt that the most remarkable aspect of " Like a Prayer " was Madonna 's usage of liturgical words . " There is the surface meaning , forging sexuality with pop lyrics that sound so sweet . But underlying that is a rigorous mediation on prayer . In shorter words , ' Like a Prayer really takes you there , " she concluded . This view was shared by biographer Mary Cross , who wrote in her biography of Madonna that " the song is a mix of the sacred and the profane . There @-@ in lies Madonna 's triumph with ' Like a Prayer ' . It still sounds catchy and danceable . " 
 Michael Campbell , author of Popular Music in America : And the Beat Goes On , felt that the soothing melody , which " flows in gently undulating phases " , resembles English singer Steve Winwood 's 1986 single " Higher Love " . Australian rock music journalist Toby Creswell wrote in his book 1001 Songs : The Great Songs of All Time and the Artists , Stories and Secrets Behind Them that " ' Like a Prayer ' is a beautifully crafted devotional song in the guise of perfect pop . God is the drum machine here . " Scholar Georges Claude Guilbert , author of Madonna as Postmodern Myth : How One Star 's Self @-@ Construction Rewrites Sex , Gender , Hollywood and the American Dream , noted that there was a polysemy in " Like a Prayer " as it was clear that the woman who sings is addressing either God , or her lover , and in doing so “ Madonna achieves the gold @-@ card of attaining her own divinity . Whenever someone calls her name , it alludes to the song . " Theologian Andrew Greeley compared " Like a Prayer " with the music and the hymns present in the Hebrew religious textbook Song of Songs . Greeley , although focusing more on the video , acknowledged the fact that sexual passion may be revelatory , and complimented Madonna for glorifying ideologies of female subjectivity and womanhood in the song . 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic called the song haunting and felt that it displayed a commanding sense of Madonna 's songcraft . According to Rolling Stone 's Gavin Edwards , it sounded glorious and " is the most transgressive — and the most irresistible " song of Madonna 's career . Jim Farber from Entertainment Weekly commented that the " gospel @-@ infused title track demonstrates that her writing and performing had been raised to heavenly new heights . " In a review for The Immaculate Collection compilation album , David Browne of Entertainment Weekly wrote that the " <unk> " texture of the song added poignancy to its spiritual lyrics . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine was impressed with the track , saying " ' Like a Prayer ' climbs to heights like no other pop song before it — or after . Like most of the songs on the album , the track 's glossy production gives way to a power beyond studio sonics , and if [ its ] ' church @-@ like ' reverence feels like a religious experience , it 's no mere coincidence . " Writing for the Official UK Charts Company , Justin Myers called " Like a Prayer " a simple love song and complemented the numerous hooks and the lyrics . He believed that the song had the potential to be successful even without its controversial music video . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Like a Prayer " debuted at number 38 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and reached the top of the chart on the issue dated April 22 , 1989 . It was number one for three weeks , before being replaced by the Bon Jovi song " I 'll Be There for You " . " Like a Prayer " also topped the Dance Club Songs chart , while reaching number three on the Adult Contemporary chart and number 20 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop songs chart . " Like a Prayer " was ranked at number 25 on the Hot 100 year @-@ end chart of 1989 , and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in May 1989 , for shipment of a million copies of the single . According to Nielsen SoundScan , it has also sold 443 @,@ 000 digital downloads as of April 2010 , becoming Madonna 's best @-@ selling digital track since SoundScan started calculating downloads in 2005 . In Canada , the song reached the top of the RPM Singles Chart in its ninth week . It was present on the chart for 16 weeks and was the top @-@ selling Canadian single for 1989 . 
 In Australia , " Like a Prayer " debuted on the ARIA Singles Chart at number three on March 19 , 1989 . The next week it reached the top of the chart , and stayed there for another four weeks . It was present for a total of 22 weeks on the chart , and was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 70 @,@ 000 copies of the single . " Like a Prayer " was also the top @-@ selling Australian single of 1989 . In New Zealand , the song had a similar run as in Australia , by debuting at number three on the RIANZ Singles Chart , and reaching number one the next week . It was present for a total of 13 weeks on the chart . " Like a Prayer " became Madonna 's seventh number one single in Japan , and occupied the top position of the Oricon Singles chart for three weeks . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Like a Prayer " entered the UK Singles Chart at number two , before moving to the top the next week , remaining there for three weeks . Madonna became the artist with the most number @-@ one singles of the 1980s in the UK , with a total of six chart @-@ toppers . " Like a Prayer " became the tenth best @-@ selling song of 1989 in the UK , with the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) certifying it gold , for shipment of 400 @,@ 000 copies of the single . According to the Official Charts Company , the song has sold 580 @,@ 000 copies there . " Like a Prayer " also reached number one in Belgium , Ireland , Norway , Sweden and Switzerland . It was Madonna 's fifth number one song on the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles chart , reaching the top on March 25 , 1989 , and staying at number one for 12 weeks . After the Glee episode " The Power of Madonna " was broadcast , " Like a Prayer " again entered the chart at position 47 , on May 15 , 2010 . The song went on to sell over five million copies worldwide . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The music video for " Like a Prayer " was directed by American film director Mary Lambert and was shot at Raleigh Studios in Hollywood , California and at San Pedro Hills in San Pedro , California . Madonna wanted the video to be more provocative than anything she had done before . She wanted to address racism by having the video depict a mixed @-@ race couple being shot by the Ku Klux Klan . However , upon further thought , she decided on another provocative theme to keep with the song 's religious connotations . When Madonna had recorded the song , she would play it over and over again ; she interpreted the visual as : 
 [ T ] his story of a girl who was madly in love with a black man , set in South , with this forbidden interracial love affair . And the guy she 's in love with sings in a choir . So she 's obsessed with him and goes to the church all the time . And then it turned into a bigger story , which was about racism and bigotry . 
 Lambert had a different visual aspect of the song on her mind . She felt that it was more about ecstasy , especially a sexual one , and how it related to religious ecstasy . She listened to the song with Madonna a number of times and came to the conclusion that the religious ecstasy part should be included . A sub @-@ plot about Madonna as a homicide witness was included and became the trigger factor in the ecstasy part of the plot . Actor Leon Robinson was hired to play the role of a saint , which was inspired by Martin de <unk> , the patron saint of mixed @-@ race people and all those seeking interracial harmony . 
 The video was shot over four days , with an extra day allotted for re @-@ shooting some of the scenes . Originally Lambert had casts taken of Leon 's face , hand and feet to create the statue of the saint which would be used as a decoration . The actor only enacted the live scenes . However , after post @-@ production started , Lambert found that the statue did not look like Leon , who was asked to re @-@ shoot the respective scenes . Leon had to act as the statue and required special make @-@ up ; he had to stand motionless during extended periods of shooting and retakes . The actor recalled that standing like a statue was difficult since " first of all , I didn 't realize how hard it is on the back to stand absolutely tall and straight and not move . Secondly , as a performer you have this nervous energy — and my requirements here were total antithesis of that . " 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The viewers first see Madonna who runs on the street . She witnesses the murder of a young woman , but is too frozen in fear to protest . A black man walking down the alley notices the incident and decides to help the woman , but the police arrive and arrest him , mistakenly suspecting him to be the killer . The murderers give a threatening look towards Madonna and leave . She escapes to a church and sees a caged saint who resembles the black man on the street . As the song starts , Madonna utters a prayer in front of the saint , who appears to be crying . 
 Madonna lies down on a pew and has a dream in which she is falling through space . Suddenly , a woman , representing power and strength , catches her . She advises Madonna to do what is right and tosses her back up . Still dreaming , Madonna returns to the saint , who becomes the black man she had seen earlier . He kisses her forehead and leaves the church as she picks up a knife and cuts her hands , bleeding . As the chorus starts , the scene shifts to Madonna as she sings and dances wildly in front of burning crosses . In the meantime a church choir sings around Madonna , who continues to dance with them . Madonna wakes up , goes to the jail and tells the police that the black man is innocent ; the police release him . The video ends as Madonna dances in front of the burning crosses , and then everybody involved in the storyline takes a bow as curtains come down on the set . 
 = = = Pepsi commercial = = = 
 In January 1989 , while the music video was still being filmed , Pepsi @-@ Cola announced that they had signed Madonna to a US $ 5 million deal to use her and " Like a Prayer " in a television commercial for them . The agreement also called for Pepsi to financially sponsor Madonna 's next world tour . Madonna would use the commercial to launch the " Like a Prayer " single globally before its actual release — the first time something like this was being done in the music industry — thereby creating promotion for the single and the album to come . Pepsi , on the other hand , would have their product associated with Madonna , thereby creating promotion for the soft drink . According to the company 's advertising head , Alan <unk> , " the global media buy and unprecedented debut of this long awaited single will put Pepsi first and foremost in consumer 's minds " . Problems started when Madonna refused to dance , " I ain 't dancing and I ain 't singing . " Joe Pytka introduced her to choreographer Vince Paterson ( from Michael Jackson days ) and she agreed to dance . She and Paterson continued their professional relationship for a number of years . Pepsi ran the expensive television commercial during the global telecast of the 31st Grammy Awards in February 1989 . A week later , the ad was premiered during NBC 's sitcom , The Cosby Show . 
 Titled " Make a Wish " , the two @-@ minute commercial portrayed Madonna back in time to revisit her childhood memories . It starts as Madonna watches a video of her childhood birthday party . As she reminisces , she interchanges places with her childhood self . The young Madonna roams aimlessly around the grown @-@ up Madonna 's room , while the latter dances with her childhood friends on the street and inside a bar . The commercial continues as Madonna dances inside a church , surrounded by a choir and her child self discovering her old play doll . As both of their lives are interchanged again , the grown @-@ up Madonna looks towards the TV and says , " Go ahead , make a wish " . Both depictions of Madonna raise their cans of Pepsi towards each other , and the young Madonna blows out the candles on her birthday cake . An estimated 250 million people around the world saw the commercial , which was directed by Joe Pytka . Pepsi @-@ Cola Company spokesman Todd MacKenzie said that the ad was planned to be aired simultaneously in Europe , Asia , Australia and North America . Bob Garfield from the Advertising Age observed that from " Turkey to El Salvador to <unk> USA , around 500 million eyes [ were ] glued to the screen . Leslie Savan from The Village Voice noted that the ad qualified as a " hymn to the global capabilities of the age of electronic reproductions ; it celebrates the pan @-@ cultural ambitions of both soda pop and pop star . " 
 = = = Reception and protests = = = 
 Taraborrelli pointed out about the actual music video that " Madonna danced with such abundance in [ it ] , as if she knew that she was about to cause a commotion , and couldn 't wait to see how it would unfold . " The day after the Pepsi commercial was premiered , Madonna released the actual music video for " Like a Prayer " on MTV , who deemed it controversial . Among music critics , Phil Kloer from Record @-@ Journal felt that whether one condemns the video as racist or not , " It 's condemnable on the face of it because it exploits a symbol of evil [ the burning crosses of the Ku Klux Klan ] in order to sell records . " Jamie Portman from The Daily Schenectady Gazette noted that " the video is vulnerable to charges of being blatantly provocative in its calculated blending of sex and religion . " David Rosenthal from The Spokesman @-@ Review found the video " visually stunning " ; however , Edna Gundersen from USA Today did not understand the media mayhem behind the video . She pointed out that " Madonna is a good girl in the video . She saves someone . What is the big deal behind it ? " Writing for the Los Angeles Times , Chris Willman complimented the video for its portrayal of a love song , rather than blasphemy . He was more interested in the stigmata presented in the video . 
 Religious groups worldwide protested against the video , which they deemed contained blasphemous use of Christian imagery . They called for the national boycott of Pepsi and PepsiCo 's subsidiaries , including their fast food chains Kentucky Fried Chicken , Taco Bell and Pizza Hut . Pepsi had decided initially to continue airing their commercial ; however , they were taken aback by the protests . They explained the differences between their advertising methods and Madonna 's artistic opinions in the video . Ultimately , Pepsi caved in to the protests , and cancelled the advertising campaign . According to Taraborrelli , Pepsi was so eager to extricate themselves from the venture that they even allowed Madonna to keep the five million dollars she had been advanced . In the meantime , Pope John Paul II involved himself in the matter and encouraged fans to boycott her Italian performances . Protests from a small Catholic organization in the country prompted Italian state television network RAI and Madonna 's Italian record company WEA to not air the video there . 
 At the 1989 MTV Video Music Awards , " Like a Prayer " was nominated in the Viewer 's Choice and Video of the Year categories , winning the former . Ironically the award show was sponsored by Pepsi in 1989 , and when Madonna came onstage to receive the award she added , " I would really like to thank Pepsi for causing so much controversy . " " Like a Prayer " also topped video countdowns and critic lists . It was number one on MTV 's countdown of " 100 Videos That Broke The Rules " in 2005 , and for the 25th anniversary of MTV , viewers voted it as the " Most Groundbreaking Music Video of All Time " . In addition , the video was ranked at number 20 on Rolling Stone 's " The 100 Top Music Videos " and at number two on VH1 's 100 Greatest Videos . Fuse TV also named " Like a Prayer " one of its 10 " Videos That Rocked The World " . In a 2011 poll by Billboard , " Like a Prayer " was voted the second best music video of the 1980s , behind only Michael Jackson 's " Thriller " . 
 = = = Themes and analysis = = = 
 Scholars and academics have offered different interpretations of the music video . Allen Metz , one of the authors of The Madonna Companion : Two Decades of Commentary , noted that when Madonna enters the church at the beginning of the video , the line " I hear you call my name , And it feels like .... Home " is played . He explained that the scene highlighted Madonna 's continued fascination with Spanish culture right from her early videos . The women of Italian East Harlem in New York call their Church as la casa di <unk> ( Momma 's House ) . In that respect , Madonna alluded herself to be one from Harlem , but also refers to her own name as the divine returning to the Church . Nicholas B. Dirks , author of Culture / power / history , argued that Madonna falling into a dream is the most important point of the narrative as it signified that " Madonna is really not putting herself in place of the redeemer , but imagining herself as one . " 
 Santiago Fouz @-@ Hernández wrote in his book Madonna 's Drowned Worlds that the Black woman who catches Madonna when she is falling through heaven in her dream , is a symbol for the divinity , as she helps Madonna throughout the video to come to the correct decision . Fouz @-@ Hernández also noted how the physical similarity between Madonna and woman indicated that it was actually Madonna 's inner divinity which was rescuing her . After the Black saint comes to life and departs from the church , Madonna picks up his dropped dagger and accidentally cut her hands . Scholar Robert McQueen Grant explained the action as a stigmata , that marked Madonna as having an important role to play in the narrative . During the second chorus , as the crime scene is shown in detail , an identification is established between Madonna and the victim . Freya Jarman @-@ Ivens , coauthor with Fouz @-@ Hernández , noted that the woman cries out for help when Madonna sings the line " When you call my name , It 's like a little prayer " . However , Madonna does nothing about it , thus portraying failure of divinity to save . According to Jarman @-@ Ivens , the look between the gang member and Madonna also sets up a complicity of " White men rape / kill women , white men blame it on Black men ; Women are raped / killed for being on the streets at night , Black men are nevertheless thrown in jail . " 
 As Madonna sings the intermediate verse amidst a field of burning crosses , she evokes the murder scene of three civil workers , portrayed in the 1988 American crime drama film Mississippi Burning . Metz noted that when Madonna dances with the choir in the altar of the church , a young Black boy joins her . This referred to the only person who had protested against the Ku Klux Klan murders in Mississippi Burning , a Black man . Metz believed it was symbolic of how his protest was now transferred in Madonna . Benson described the erotic scene between the saint and Madonna as " leading the viewer to a single conclusion through its numerous cut @-@ scenes of burning crosses , shocked face of Madonna , bleeding eye of the icon etc that Black men have been martyred for kissing white women or even wanting them . " Grant believed this was where the racial equality message of the video came across as most poignant . On the contrary , when the curtain falls and the scene shifts to a smiling Madonna among the burning crosses , professor Maury Dean felt that another explanation was inevitable . Madonna portrays a successful heroine and thus the whole video becomes about female empowerment . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The first live performance of " Like a Prayer " was on the 1990 Blond Ambition World Tour . Madonna started the performance by uttering the word " God ? " suddenly , as everything became silent . Then she started singing " Like a Prayer " , donning a dress that looked like a cross between a Mediterranean widow 's attire and evocative clergyman 's robes . A red velvet bed , which was present during the previous performance , was replaced by hundreds of burning candles . At the beginning of the song , Madonna knelt down in front of the stage , as the backup singers cried the words " Oh my God " several times . Madonna eventually removed a scarf from her head to display a huge crucifix hanging from her neck , and then rose and sang the full song , while her dancers gyrated around her . Two different performances were taped and released on video : the Blond Ambition : Japan Tour 90 , taped in Yokohama , Japan , on April 27 , 1990 , and Blond Ambition World Tour Live , taped in Nice , France , on August 5 , 1990 . On his review of Blond Ambition World Tour Live , Entertainment Weekly 's Ty Burr praised the " gymnastic dance productions in songs such as ' Where 's the Party ' and ' Like a Prayer ' " , calling them " astonishing " . 
 In 2003 , Madonna released her ninth studio album , American Life . While doing a set of short promotional performances for the album , Madonna sang " Like a Prayer " , with the choir portion of the song being replaced by guitar sounds . The song was also included in the set list of the Re @-@ Invention World Tour of 2004 . Members of the audience asked to sing along with her , filling in the part of the choir . Backup vocalist Siedah Garrett sang the vocals during the intermediate verses , while the backdrops displayed a series of Hebrew letters , indicating the 72 names of God . Jim Farber from New York magazine complimented Madonna 's vocals during the song . The performance was included on the 2006 live album of the tour , titled I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret . Madonna sang a similar version of the song during the Live 8 benefit concert at Hyde Park , London in July 2005 . She performed it alongside <unk> <unk> , an Ethiopian woman who , as a malnourished toddler , had appeared in some of the footage of the 1984 – 85 famine in Ethiopia . Roger Friedman from Fox News Channel praised her performance , describing her voice as " rich , supple and perfect " . Conversely , Chicago Tribune 's Jill Lawless found Madonna 's delivery to be uninspiring and " cathartic " . 
 A dance version of the song , mixed with fragments of the dance track " Feels Like Home " by Meck , was performed in the 2008 – 09 Sticky & Sweet Tour as part of the rave segment . Madonna 's line " feels like home " was replaced by the same line from Meck ’ s song . In the rave segment , Madonna appeared wearing a breastplate and a short wig . She danced energetically around the whole stage as backup singer Nicki Richards provided vocals during the intermediate solo . Screens displayed a message of equality of religions , as symbols and texts from different scriptures flashed by , including messages from the Bible , Qur 'an , Torah and Talmud . The performance ended with the line " We all come from the Light and to it shall we return " , as a circular screen covered Madonna to give way to the next song , " Ray of Light " . Helen Brown from The Daily Telegraph declared the performance as one of the highlights of the tour , while Joey Guerra from Houston Chronicle compared the sequences of Madonna rising on a platform with that of a superhero . The performance was included both in the CD and DVD of the live release of the tour , titled Sticky & Sweet Tour , filmed in Buenos Aires , Argentina from December 4 – 7 , 2008 . In January 2010 , Madonna performed an acoustic version of the song live during the Hope For Haiti telethon . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times commented : " For 20 years , that song has been the symbol of one of the most tumultuous and controversial periods in Madonna 's life . But for five minutes tonight , it was pure , put in service of something bigger than the singer . " 
 For The MDNA Tour in 2012 , a modernized gospel version of " Like a Prayer " was performed as the second @-@ to @-@ last song of the show . This version featured Madonna and 36 of her back @-@ up singers , who played the role of a choir and wore church robes , energetically performing the song as images of a gothic church and Hebrew letters appeared on the backdrops . Critical response towards the performance was generally positive , with many reviewers deeming it a highlight of the show . Jim Harrington from The Oakland Tribune gave the overall concert a negative review but stated that " It wasn 't until the last two songs — " Like a Prayer " and " Celebration " — that the whole deal finally clicked " . Timothy Finn from The Kansas City Star was particularly impressed with the backing choir , calling it " the best use of one since Foreigner ’ s " I Want to Know What Love Is " . The performance of the song at the November 19 – 20 , 2012 shows in Miami , at the American Airlines Arena , were recorded and released in Madonna 's fourth live album , MDNA World Tour . 
 On October 27 , 2015 , during the Inglewood stop of her Rebel Heart Tour , Madonna performed " Like a Prayer " . The performance began with the singer playing the acoustic guitar before asking the crowd to sing along with her . She also performed the song during her concert in Stockholm , Sweden , on November 14 , 2015 , dedicating it to the victims of the terrorist attacks that took place in Paris , France , two days before . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 One of the first cover versions of the song was done by folk singer @-@ songwriter John Wesley Harding , for his 1989 extended play , God Made Me Do It : The Christmas EP . The 1999 and 2000 compilation albums , Virgin Voices : A Tribute To Madonna , Vol . 1 and Vol . 2 , included a cover of " Like a Prayer " by singers <unk> Holloway and electro @-@ industrial band Bigod 20 . An uptempo eurodance remix was made by DJ group Sound Assassins for the remix album <unk> Speed 2 , released in Japan in March 1999 . The song was redone as a hi @-@ NRG / eurodance song in 2002 by a group called Mad 'House , and was included in their album , Absolutely Mad . It was released as a single and was a commercial success , reaching the top of the charts in Austria , Germany , Ireland and the Netherlands , the top ten in Belgium ( Flanders and Wallonia regions ) , France , Switzerland and the United Kingdom , and the top twenty in Denmark and Sweden . On the European Hot 100 Singles chart of Billboard , it reached a peak of two . A folk music cover of the song by Lavender Diamond was included on the 2007 Madonna tribute compilation Through the Wilderness , with an accompanying music video made by Peter Glantz . 
 " Like a Prayer " was featured in an episode of American television series , Glee , called " The Power of Madonna " . It was sung at the end of the episode by the fictional show choir New Directions , performed by the Glee cast members . The song was released as a digital downloadable single to the iTunes Store , and was also included on the soundtrack EP , Glee : The Music , The Power of Madonna . The cover version reached number 28 in Australia , number 27 in Canada , number two in Ireland , and number 16 in the United Kingdom . In the United States , the song debuted at number 27 on the Billboard Hot 100 , while entering the Hot Digital Songs chart at number ten , with sales of 87 @,@ 000 copies . 
 DJs Meck and Dino did a mash up of his 2007 single " Feels Like Home " with " Like a Prayer " , and released it as " Feels Like a Prayer " . The song reached the top ten in Belgium ( Flanders region ) and the Netherlands , while peaking at number 15 in Belgium ( Walloon region ) . In the United States , " Feels Like a Prayer " debuted at number 36 on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart , and reached a peak of number six , after seven weeks . We Are the Fallen , an American gothic metal band , covered " Like a Prayer " live in 2008 . Nick Duerden from Spin felt the song was " so successfully pulverized that one wondered whether it wasn 't written specifically to become the world 's greatest heavy rock anthem . " Canadian singer @-@ songwriter Nelly Furtado included " Like a Prayer " in the set list of her The Spirit Indestructible Tour . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 " Like a Prayer " is considered to be one of the best songs of Madonna 's career . It was ranked sixth on Blender magazine 's list of " The 500 Greatest Songs Since You Were Born " , while Rolling Stone included it in their list of " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " , at number 300 . In 2003 , Madonna fans were asked to vote for their " Top 20 Madonna singles of all @-@ time " , by Q magazine . " Like a Prayer " was allocated the number one spot on the list . Another similar poll conducted by MSN Entertainment in 2008 had the same result . In 2014 , LA Weekly placed the song at rank two on their list of " The 20 Best Pop Songs in History By Female Artists " . Art <unk> from the publication opined that " ' Like a Prayer ' was the moment when Madonna went from being the voice of America 's teenagers to the worldwide high priestess of pop . " At their ranking of the best songs from the 1980s , Pitchfork Media listed " Like a Prayer " at number 50 . 
 Campbell noted that the popularity and the media mayhem surrounding the song and the music video helped introduce a very important factor in the celebrity world : the reception of free publicity . " Like a Prayer " ' s impact was more evident on its parent studio album , which shot to the top of the charts once it was released in April 1989 . The music video also served as evidence of the emergence of the video commodity as a different entity from the song that spawned it . As author Judith Marcus argued in her book Surviving the Twentieth Century , Madonna used the church to make her point on victimization . For Marcus , the main impact of the video lies in the fact that Madonna emerged from the role of a victim by " empowering " herself . The author asserted that the video metaphorically " attacked " the Church 's demand for female compliance , indicted the Church 's precept of a dichotomy between body and spirit , and at the same time assailed the Church 's denial of female spirituality . Campbell noted that the video does not follow any definite narrative , although there is a plethora of images in it . He found sequences where Madonna does not sing the song , but her voice is heard , as most interesting since it pointed out the rapid evolution of the music video medium and Madonna 's own work , which had moved beyond a simple capture of a live performance , as was the case for the music video of her first single , " Everybody " ( 1982 ) ; by 1989 , such videos were already a distant memory . 
 Like the video , Campbell noted the song for merging disparate and contradictory musical features in it . He found that the simple melody of " Like a Prayer " offered an easy listen , as the contrasts in sound , rhythm and texture appealed to different target audiences . He also believed that the usage of choir and organ paved the way for gospel music to be more mainstream than before . In 1999 , the University of Michigan School of Music , Theatre & Dance held a seminar on the different implications and metaphors present in the song ; it was headed by professors Martin Katz , George Shirley and Michael Daugherty . The main topic discussed was the fact that there can be different metaphorical meanings of the song , as the word " like " can be taken in separate contexts . Shirley explained that although when one thinks of " Like a Prayer " , they would first think of its visual aspects , but for him the lyrics are far more important as they reinforce the postmodern nature of the video . The ambiguity of the word " like " blurs distinctions between a human lover and God , evident strongly in the line " Like a child , you whisper softly to me " . This was further explained by Katz , who added : " The music of ' Like a Prayer ' is probably a mitigating one , blunting and softening the harder edges , the more challenging content of the lyrics and the video . " 
 Taraborrelli commented that " in the end , the events surrounding ' Like a Prayer ' only served to enhance Madonna 's reputation as a shrewd businesswoman , someone who knows how to sell a concept . " Before Madonna 's deal with Pepsi , pop stars in general were not given much artistic freedom by sponsors . However , Madonna had said from the very first day that she would be doing the commercial in her very own way , which Pepsi had to accept . While she said that it was never her intention that Pepsi be the fall guy in the fiasco surrounding the video , Taraborrelli argues that Madonna stayed true to herself . Although the commercial intended to promote Pepsi the soft drink , she did not bother to hold even a can of the product , leading Taraborrelli to comment that " Madonna the pop star was going to do it her way , no matter what Madonna the businesswoman had agreed to do . " She maintained all along that the Pepsi ad and the music video were two different commodities and she was right to stand her ground . Taraborrelli noted that after " Like a Prayer " , the recruitment of pop stars and athletes to sell soft drinks became commonplace . However , none of them generated the level of excitement on par with Pepsi 's failed deal with Madonna . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Like a Prayer album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Typhoon Dolphin ( 2015 ) = 
 Typhoon Dolphin was a powerful tropical cyclone that produced the first typhoon @-@ force winds on Guam since Typhoon Pongsona in 2002 . The seventh named storm of the 2015 Pacific typhoon season , Dolphin formed on May 6 in the vicinity of the Federated States of Micronesia ( FSM ) . Moving eastward at first , the storm slowly organized before beginning a north and west @-@ northwest trajectory . Dolphin intensified into a typhoon before passing between Guam and Rota on May 15 , producing typhoon @-@ force winds on both islands . It later rapidly intensified as it curved to the north . The American @-@ based Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) designated Dolphin as a super typhoon , while the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) estimated 10 minute sustained winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Dolphin turned to the northeast and weakened , becoming extratropical on May 20 and exiting the western Pacific basin on May 24 . 
 The storm first affected the FSM , notably Pohnpei where it dropped 603 mm ( 23 @.@ 73 in ) of rainfall over three days . The rains and gusty winds knocked down many trees on the island , one of which killed a person , and causing $ 1 million in damage ( 2015 USD ) . Dolphin passed between Guam and Rota , producing gusts of 171 km / h ( 106 mph ) at Andersen Air Force Base on northern Guam . The winds left 40 % of the island without power and left at least 3 @,@ 300 people without water . The storm also dropped heavy rainfall , flooding Guam Memorial Hospital . Dolphin damaged 390 houses , including nine that were destroyed , leaving 1 @,@ 055 people homeless . With damage estimated at around $ 10 million , the island was declared a disaster area . The typhoon also brushed Rota , causing $ 2 @.@ 5 million in damage there , as well as Saipan . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Dolphin were related to a strong westerly wind burst that also led to the formation of previous Typhoon Noul . Early on May 5 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began monitoring an area of deep convection approximately 300 km ( 185 mi ) southwest of Pohnpei . It had a poorly @-@ defined circulation and broad rainbands , while low to moderate wind shear and warm sea surface temperatures favored development . The convection quickly became better organized and more concentrated around the broad center , aided by increased outflow . The Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the system as a tropical depression at 06 : 00 UTC on May 6 about 325 km ( 200 mi ) southwest of Pohnpei . At 21 : 00 UTC that day , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) also began issuing advisories on the system , classifying it as Tropical Depression 07W . 
 After its formation , the depression moved slowly with the low @-@ level flow , in what the JTWC described as an " atypical eastward direction " . Wind shear in the region exposed the convection from the circulation early on May 7 , although the thunderstorms increased the next day , mostly in the storm 's northwest quadrant . A building subtropical ridge turned the system more to the north . By May 8 , the depression organized enough for the JTWC to upgrade it to a tropical storm . At 12 : 00 UTC on the next day , the JMA followed suit and upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Dolphin . By that time , the system had developed rainbands spiraling around the circulation , although continued wind shear left the center exposed . Around that time , Dolphin passed about 80 km ( 50 mi ) west of Kosrae in the Federated States of Micronesia ( FSM ) , and over the next few days it passed near other small islands in the region . Despite the sheared structure , the storm developed an eye feature on May 11 , indicative of further strengthening , while the storm was passing 285 km ( 180 mi ) east of Pohnpei . That day , the shear began to decrease , allowing the outflow to improve and convection to blossom . Early on May 12 , the JMA upgraded Dolphin to a severe tropical storm , estimating 10 minute winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . 
 On May 12 , Dolphin began moving steadily to the west @-@ northwest . It developed a persistent central dense overcast over the center as conditions became increasingly favorable . At 00 : 00 UTC , the JMA and JTWC both upgraded Dolphin to typhoon status , based on a developing eye feature . The eye , initially only 9 km ( 6 mi ) in diameter , became more defined in the center of the convection . The intensification trend was soon halted by a combination of moderate southerly wind shear and dry air from the west , causing the eye to become obscured on conventional satellite imagery . On May 15 , the wind shear once again lessened . The compact core persisted during this time , although the center was slightly obscured . As the typhoon approached Guam , radar imagery tracked the eye underneath the deepest convection . Late on May 15 , Dolphin passed between Guam and Rota , bringing its eyewall over both islands . 
 After leaving the Marianas Islands , the eye of Dolphin became much larger as the storm developed strong outflow channels , both indicative of further strengthening . On May 16 , the typhoon began rapid deepening as it reached the western periphery of the ridge , causing it to turn more to the north . At 06 : 00 UTC that day , the JMA estimated peak 10 minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Based on the well @-@ defined structure and Dvorak ratings of <unk> , the JTWC upgraded Dolphin to a super typhoon late on May 16 with 1 minute winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) . The approaching westerlies turned Dolphin to the north and northeast on May 17 while also imparting unfavorable conditions , causing the eye and the convection to elongate and weaken . By May 18 , increased wind shear had exposed the circulation as the winds continued to drop . After the convection decreased further , the JTWC discontinued advisories on Dolphin on May 19 , once Dolphin was beginning to become extratropical near the Japanese island of Iwo Jima . On the next day , the winds fell below typhoon force , and at 00 : 00 UTC on May 21 , the JMA declared Dolphin extratropical . The storm accelerated to the northeast , passing through the Aleutian Islands on May 22 . The storm slowed once reaching the Gulf of Alaska , turning eastward to cross the International Date Line on May 24 . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 Early in Dolphin 's duration , it moved through the eastern FSM . On Kosrae , winds peaked at 60 km / h ( 37 mph ) . Later , the outer rainbands affected Pohnpei , producing a gust of 88 km / h ( 55 mph ) , as well as heavy rainfall . Over three days , the precipitation reached 603 mm ( 23 @.@ 73 in ) of rainfall over three days , including 388 mm ( 15 @.@ 26 in ) in one day . This accounted for about one @-@ third of Pohnpei 's record monthly rainfall total of 1 @,@ 109 mm ( 43 @.@ 68 in ) for May 2015 . The high winds downed hundreds of trees , some of which fell onto cars and homes , and killed one person . One family in Palikir needed medical attention when a tree fell onto their house . Residents lost power and water access for up to two weeks . Many houses had damage to roofs , and about 200 homes on Pohnpei were damaged or destroyed . Crops also sustained damage from high waves causing salt intrusion , affecting taro patches . Damage in the FSM was estimated at $ 1 million . In response to the damage , the FSM government declared Pohnpei as a state of emergency on June 8 . The typhoon 's westerly winds produced a swell that affected the Marshall Islands , sinking several boats in Kwajalein Atoll . 
 In preparation for the cyclone , schools , businesses , and public transit were closed on Guam . The Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) deployed approximately 15 representatives to the island to mitigate the response time in the wake of the storm . Eight schools were opened as shelters , and more than 1 @,@ 000 residents sought refuge during the height of the storm . Additional shelters were opened on the islands of Rota , Tinian , and Saipan in the Northern Mariana Islands ( <unk> ) , and nearly 200 people sought cover there . Airports and seaports between the three islands were shut down , causing flights to be canceled . Earlier in 2015 , the Guam Weather Forecast Office created a Facebook page to help inform residents about typhoons ; during Dolphin , the page received over 425 @,@ 000 views . 
 Passing just north of Guam , Dolphin produced the first typhoon @-@ force winds on the island since 2002 during Typhoon Pongsona . Andersen Air Force Base recorded sustained winds of 135 km / h ( 84 mph ) , while gusts reached 171 km / h ( 106 mph ) . In the central portion of the island , the NWS office recorded gusts of 130 km / h ( 81 mph ) . The storm dropped torrential rainfall during its passage , reaching over 460 mm ( 18 in ) at Andersen Air Force Base , of which 240 mm ( 9 @.@ 3 in ) fell within a 12 @-@ hour period . Wave heights offshore Guam topped 6 @.@ 1 m ( 20 ft ) . On Guam , the heavy rainfall caused flooding in areas lacking proper drainage . The Guam Memorial Hospital sustained about $ 1 million in damage from storm @-@ related flooding . High winds left about 40 % of Guam without power , mostly in the north and central portions of the island , although the outages were fixed within a few days . The power outages also disrupted generators for water wells , leaving 3 @,@ 300 people without access to clean water ; residents in some areas were under a boil @-@ water advisory . Utility damage was estimated at $ 3 million . Businesses sustained $ 1 @.@ 9 million in damage . Dolphin also caused $ 1 @.@ 2 million worth of crop damage . The typhoon damaged over 7 @,@ 000 banana trees as well as 39 of the endangered ironwood trees . Rough waves sank a boat at Apra Harbor , requiring workers to clean oil that escaped from the damaged vessel . Dolphin damaged 390 houses across Guam , of which 9 were destroyed and another 55 were severely damaged . This left 1 @,@ 055 people homeless , mostly in the towns of Yigo or <unk> . Overall damage was estimated at nearly $ 10 million , prompting Governor Eddie Calvo to declare a state of emergency . On June 5 , President Barack Obama signed a major disaster declaration for the territory , allowing for federal aid to be used . Ultimately , the government provided about $ 4 @.@ 7 million in aid , mostly in public assistance . A federal grant provided 220 temporary jobs toward cleaning and repairing damage . 
 On Rota to the north of Guam , Dolphin produced the first typhoon @-@ force winds since 2004 during Chaba . The storm damaged many homes on the island . High winds knocked down trees and power lines , causing an island @-@ wide power outage . Damage on Rota was estimated at $ 2 @.@ 5 million . Continued high waves from the typhoon caused difficult conditions for ships trying to bring supplies to the country , after store supplies began running out . Workers quickly repaired the power outages and cleared roads of any storm debris . The government of the <unk> declared Rota a disaster area , meaning emergency funds could be allocated toward relief and reconstruction . On Saipan to the north of Rota , wind gusts reached 101 km / h ( 63 mph ) , while rainfall totaled 89 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) . 
 The remnants of Dolphin , in conjunction with previous Typhoon Noul , shifted the broader weather pattern to bring record warmth to Alaska , making the temperatures warmer than that of Washington , D.C .. 
 = David Larson = 
 David Erwin Larson ( born June 25 , 1959 ) is an American former competition swimmer who is an Olympic gold medalist and former world record @-@ holder . Larson is a Georgia native who became an All @-@ American college swimmer for the University of Florida . He was known for his success as a member of American relay teams in international competition at the Pan American Games and the Olympics – and for setting two world records in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter relay event on the same day at the 1984 Olympics . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Larson was born in the small town of Jesup , Georgia in 1959 . He started swimming as an age @-@ group competitor in 1963 . He attended the Bolles School in Jacksonville , Florida , where he swam for the Bolles high school swim team . He graduated from Bolles in 1977 . 
 = = College swimming career = = 
 Larson accepted an athletic scholarship to attend the University of Florida in Gainesville , Florida , where he swam for the Florida Gators swimming and diving team in National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) and Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) competition under coach Randy Reese from 1978 to 1981 . Larson won two NCAA championships at Florida in the 800 @-@ yard freestyle relay ( 1979 , 1981 ) , setting American and NCAA records in the process . He finished second in the 200 @-@ yard freestyle to Rowdy Gaines of Auburn in 1981 , but then out @-@ swam Gaines on the final leg of the 800 @-@ yard freestyle relay to claim the NCAA championship in the event . Larson earned twenty @-@ one All @-@ American honors and was national record holder in the 400 @-@ yard freestyle relay . 
 Larson graduated from the University of Florida with a bachelor 's degree in sociology in 1987 , and was later inducted into the University of Florida Athletic Hall of Fame as a " Gator Great . " 
 = = International swimming career = = 
 Larson was first selected for the U.S. national swim team for the 1979 Pan American Games held in San Juan , Puerto Rico . In what would become a regular match @-@ up , Larson earned a silver medal in the men 's 200 @-@ meter freestyle for his second @-@ place finish ( 1 : 52 @.@ 24 ) behind American teammate Rowdy Gaines ( 1 : 51 @.@ 22 ) . Two days later , Larson and Gaines combined with fellow Americans Brian Goodell and Kris Kirchner to win a Pan American Games gold medal in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay ( 7 : 31 @.@ 28 ) . 
 He qualified for the U.S. Olympic Team in 1980 , as a member of the U.S. team in the men 's 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay , but was unable to compete because of the United States @-@ led boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympics held in Moscow . After completing his college career in 1981 , Larson was tired of swimming and quit , only to return to competition a year later because he missed the focus . Larson continued his training with the program that coach Randy Reese had created for post @-@ college swimmers in Gainesville , Florida . 
 At the 1983 Pan American Games in Caracas , Venezuela , he again won a gold medal as a member of the winning U.S. team in the men 's 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay , together with Richard Saeger , Bruce Hayes and Rowdy Gaines ( 7 : 23 @.@ 63 ) . 
 Larson represented the United States at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles . In the preliminary heats of the men 's 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay , he and U.S. teammates Geoff <unk> , Hayes and Saeger set a new world record of 7 : 18 @.@ 87 . But the new record was short @-@ lived . Later that same afternoon , Larson won the gold medal in the event final of the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay , together with his American teammates Mike Heath , Jeff Float and Hayes , by defeating the Michael Gross @-@ anchored West German team by four one @-@ hundredths ( 0 @.@ 04 ) of a second , and setting yet another new world record of 7 : 15 @.@ 69 in the process . The American media dubbed the four swimmers the " Gross Busters , " a play on the title of the popular 1984 movie Ghostbusters . 
 In the aftermath of the 1984 Olympics , Larson retired from competitive swimming at the age of 25 . 
 = = Life after swimming = = 
 After the post @-@ Olympic national celebrations , Larson was offered an opportunity to work in sports marketing in New York City . His early professional career involved dealings with agents , creating event sponsorships , and negotiating athlete contracts . He spent the next decade working in sports marketing , then in television . He worked with NBC on its Olympic broadcasts , including the 2005 Winter Games . 
 Larson and his wife Kitty , a Miami lawyer , have a son . 
 = = World records = = 
 Men 's 4 × 200 @-@ meter medley relay 
 = Nixon in China = 
 Nixon in China is an opera in three acts by John Adams , with a libretto by Alice Goodman . Adams ' first opera , it was inspired by U.S. President Richard Nixon 's visit to China in 1972 . The work premiered at the Houston Grand Opera on October 22 , 1987 , in a production by Peter Sellars with choreography by Mark Morris . When Sellars approached Adams with the idea for the opera in 1985 , Adams was initially reluctant , but eventually decided that the work could be a study in how myths come to be , and accepted the project . Goodman 's libretto was the result of considerable research into Nixon 's visit , though she disregarded most sources published after 1972 . 
 To create the sounds he sought , Adams augmented the orchestra with a large saxophone section , additional percussion , and electronic synthesizer . Although sometimes described as " minimalist " , the score displays a variety of musical styles , embracing minimalism after the manner of Philip Glass alongside passages echoing 19th @-@ century composers such as Wagner and Johann Strauss . With these ingredients , Adams mixes <unk> 20th @-@ century neoclassicism , jazz references , and big band sounds reminiscent of Nixon 's youth in the 1930s . The combination of these elements varies frequently , to reflect changes in the onstage action . 
 Following the 1987 premiere , the opera received mixed reviews ; some critics dismissed the work , predicting it would soon vanish . However , it has been presented on many occasions since , in both Europe and North America , and has been recorded twice . In 2011 , the opera received its Metropolitan Opera debut , a production based on the original sets , and in the same year was given an abstract production in Toronto by the Canadian Opera Company . Recent critical opinion has tended to recognize the work as a significant and lasting contribution to American opera . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Historical background = = = 
 During his rise to power , Richard Nixon became known as a leading anti @-@ communist . After he became president in 1969 , Nixon saw advantages in improving relations with China and the Soviet Union ; he hoped that détente would put pressure on the North Vietnamese to end the Vietnam War , and he might be able to manipulate the two main communist powers to the benefit of the United States . 
 Nixon laid the groundwork for his overture to China even before he became president , writing in Foreign Affairs a year before his election : " There is no place on this small planet for a billion of its potentially most able people to live in angry isolation . " Assisting him in this venture was his National Security Advisor , Henry Kissinger , with whom the President worked closely , bypassing Cabinet officials . With relations between the Soviet Union and China at a nadir — border clashes between the two took place during Nixon 's first year in office — Nixon sent private word to the Chinese that he desired closer relations . A breakthrough came in early 1971 , when Chairman Mao invited a team of American table tennis players to visit China and play against top Chinese players . Nixon followed up by sending Kissinger to China for clandestine meetings with Chinese officials . 
 The announcement that Nixon would visit China in 1972 made world headlines . Almost immediately , the Soviet Union also invited Nixon for a visit , and improved US @-@ Soviet relations led to the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks ( SALT ) . Nixon 's visit to China was followed closely by many Americans , and the scenes of him there were widely aired on television . Chinese Premier Chou En @-@ lai stated that the handshake he and Nixon had shared on the airport tarmac at the beginning of the visit was " over the <unk> distance in the world , 25 years of no communication " . Nixon 's change , from virulent anti @-@ communist to the American leader who took the first step in improving Sino @-@ American relations , led to a new political adage , " Only Nixon could go to China . " 
 = = = Inception = = = 
 In 1983 , theater and opera director Peter Sellars proposed to American composer John Adams that he write an opera about Nixon 's 1972 visit to China . Sellars was intrigued by Nixon 's decision to make the visit , seeing it as both " a ridiculously cynical election ploy ... and a historical breakthrough " . Adams , who had not previously attempted an opera , was initially skeptical , assuming that Sellars was proposing a satire . Sellars persisted , however , and Adams , who had interested himself in the origin of myths , came to believe the opera could show how mythic origins may be found in contemporary history . Both men agreed that the opera would be heroic in nature , rather than poking fun at Nixon or Mao . Sellars invited Alice Goodman to join the project as librettist , and the three met at the Kennedy Center in Washington D.C. in 1985 to begin intensive study of the six characters , three American and three Chinese , upon whom the opera would focus . The trio endeavored to go beyond the stereotypes about figures such as Nixon and Chinese Chairman Mao Tse @-@ tung and to examine their personalities . 
 As Adams worked on the opera , he came to see Nixon , whom he had once intensely disliked , as an " interesting character " , a complicated individual who sometimes showed emotion in public . Adams wanted Mao to be " the Mao of the huge posters and Great Leap Forward ; I cast him as a <unk> " . Mao 's wife , on the other hand , was to be " not just a shrieking coloratura , but also someone who in the opera 's final act can reveal her private fantasies , her erotic desires , and even a certain tragic awareness . Nixon himself is a sort of Simon Boccanegra , a self @-@ doubting , lyrical , at times self @-@ pitying melancholy baritone . " 
 Goodman explained her characterizations : 
 A writer tends to find her characters in her self , so I can tell you ... that Nixon , Pat , Mme. Mao , Kissinger and the chorus were all ' me . ' And the inner lives of Mao and Chou En @-@ Lai , who I couldn 't find in myself at all , were drawn from a couple of close acquaintances . 
 Sellars , who was engaged at the time in staging the three Mozart – Da Ponte operas , became interested in the ensembles in those works ; this interest is reflected in Nixon in China 's final act . The director encouraged Adams and Goodman to make other allusions to classical operatic forms ; thus the expectant chorus that begins the work , the heroic aria for Nixon following his entrance , and the dueling toasts in the final scene of Act 1 . In rehearsal , Sellars revised the staging for the final scene , changing it from a banquet hall in the aftermath of a slightly alcohol @-@ fueled dinner to the characters ' bedrooms . 
 The work required sacrifices : Goodman later noted that choruses which she loved were dropped for the improvement of the opera as a whole . The work provoked bitter arguments among the three . Nevertheless , musicologist Timothy Johnson , in his 2011 book about Nixon in China , noted " the result of the collaboration betrays none of these disagreements among its creators who successfully blended their differing points of view into a very satisfyingly cohesive whole " . 
 = = Roles = = 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Time : February 1972 . 
 Place : In and around Beijing ( then known as Peking ) 
 = = = Act 1 = = = 
 At Peking Airport , contingents of the Chinese military await the arrival of the American presidential aircraft " Spirit of ' 76 " , carrying Nixon and his party . The military chorus sings the Three Rules of Discipline and Eight Points for Attention . After the aircraft touches down , Nixon emerges with Pat Nixon and Henry Kissinger . The president exchanges stilted greetings with the Chinese premier , Chou En @-@ lai , who heads the welcoming party . Nixon speaks of the historical significance of the visit , and of his hopes and fears for the encounter ( " News has a kind of mystery " ) . The scene changes to Chairman Mao 's study , where the Chairman awaits the arrival of the presidential party . Nixon and Kissinger enter with Chou , and Mao and the president converse in <unk> as photographers record the scene . In the discussion that follows , the westerners are confused by Mao 's gnomic and frequently impenetrable comments , which are amplified by his secretaries and often by Chou . The scene changes again , to the evening 's banquet in the Great Hall of the People . Chou toasts the American visitors ( " We have begun to celebrate the different ways " ) Nixon responds : ( " I have attended many feasts " ) , after which the toasts continue , as the atmosphere becomes increasingly convivial . Nixon , a politician who rose to prominence on anti @-@ communism , announces : " Everyone , listen ; just let me say one thing . I opposed China , I was wrong " . 
 = = = Act 2 = = = 
 Pat Nixon is touring the city , with guides . Factory workers present her with a small model elephant which , she delightedly informs them , is the symbol of the Republican Party which her husband leads . She visits a commune where she is greeted enthusiastically , and is captivated by the children 's games that she observes in the school . " I used to be a teacher many years ago " , she sings , " and now I 'm here to learn from you " . She moves on to the Summer Palace , where in a contemplative aria ( " This is prophetic " ) she envisages a peaceful future for the world . In the evening the presidential party , as guests of Mao 's wife Chiang Ch 'ing , attends the Peking Opera for a performance of a political ballet @-@ opera The Red Detachment of Women . This depicts the downfall of a cruel and unscrupulous landlord 's agent ( played by an actor who strongly resembles Kissinger ) at the hands of brave women revolutionary workers . The action deeply affects the Nixons ; at one point Pat rushes onstage to help a peasant girl she thinks is being whipped to death . As the stage action ends , Chiang Ch 'ing , angry at the apparent misinterpretation of the piece 's message , sings a harsh aria ( " I am the wife of Mao Tse @-@ tung " ) , praising the Cultural Revolution and glorifying her own part in it . A revolutionary chorus echoes her words . 
 = = = Act 3 = = = 
 On the last evening of the visit , as they lie in their respective beds , the chief protagonists muse on their personal histories in a surreal series of interwoven dialogues . Nixon and Pat recall the struggles of their youth ; Nixon evokes wartime memories ( " Sitting round the radio " ) . Mao and Chiang Ch 'ing dance together , as the Chairman remembers " the tasty little starlet " who came to his headquarters in the early days of the revolution . As they reminisce , Chiang Ch 'ing asserts that " the revolution must not end " . Chou meditates alone ; the opera finishes on a thoughtful note with his aria " I am old and I cannot sleep " , asking : " How much of what we did was good ? " The early morning <unk> are summoning him to resume his work , while " outside this room the chill of grace lies heavy on the morning grass " . 
 = = Performance history = = 
 The work had been commissioned jointly by the Houston Grand Opera , the Brooklyn Academy of Music , Netherlands Opera and the Washington Opera , all of which were to mount early productions of the opera . Fearful that the work might be challenged as defamatory or not in the public domain , Houston Grand Opera obtained insurance to cover such an eventuality . Before its stage premiere , the opera was presented in concert form in May 1987 in San Francisco , with intermission discussions led by Adams . According to the Los Angeles Times review , a number of audience members left as the work proceeded . 
 Nixon in China formally premiered on the Brown Stage at the new Wortham Theatre Center in Houston on October 22 , 1987 , with John <unk> conducting the Houston Grand Opera . Former president Nixon was invited , and was sent a copy of the libretto ; however , his staff indicated that he was unable to attend , due to illness and an impending publication deadline . A Nixon representative later stated that the former president disliked seeing himself on television or other media , and had little interest in opera . According to Adams , he was later told by former Nixon lawyer Leonard Garment that Nixon was highly interested in everything written about him , and so likely saw the Houston production when it was televised on PBS ' Great Performances . 
 The piece opened in conjunction with the annual meeting of the Music Critics Association , guaranteeing what the Houston Chronicle described as a " very discriminating audience " . Members of the association also attended meetings with the opera 's production team . When <unk> Page , originating Pat Nixon , waved to the audience in character as First Lady , many waved back at her . Adams responded to complaints that the words were difficult to understand ( no supertitles were provided ) by indicating that it is not necessary that all the words be understood on first seeing an opera . The audience 's general reaction was expressed by what the Los Angeles Times termed " polite applause " , the descent of the Spirit of ' 76 being the occasion for clapping from both the onstage chorus and from the viewers in the opera house . 
 When the opera reached the Brooklyn Academy of Music , six weeks after the world premiere , there was again applause during the Spirit of ' 76 's descent . Chou En @-@ lai 's toast , addressed by baritone Sanford Sylvan directly to the audience , brought what pianist and writer William R. Braun called " a shocked hush of chastened admiration " . The meditative Act 3 also brought silence , followed at its conclusion by a storm of applause . On March 26 , 1988 , the work opened at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington , DC , where Nixon 's emergence from the plane was again met with applause . 
 After the opera 's European premiere at the <unk> in Amsterdam in June 1988 , it received its first German performance later that year at the Bielefeld Opera , in a production by John Dew with stage designs by Gottfried Pilz . In the German production , Nixon and Mao were given putty noses in what the Los Angeles Times considered " a garish and heavy @-@ handed satire " . Also in 1988 the opera received its United Kingdom premiere , at the Edinburgh International Festival in August . 
 For the Los Angeles production in 1990 , Sellars made revisions to darken the opera in the wake of the Tiananmen Square protests . The original production had not had an intermission between Acts 2 and 3 ; one was inserted , and Sellars authorized supertitles , which he had forbidden in Houston . Adams conducted the original cast in the French premiere , at the Maison de la Culture de <unk> , Paris , on December 14 , 1991 . Thereafter , performances of the opera became relatively rare ; writing in the New York Times in April 1996 , Alex Ross speculated on why the work had , at that time , " dropped from sight " . 
 The London premiere of the opera took place in 2000 , at the London Coliseum , with Sellars producing and Paul Daniel conducting the English National Opera ( ENO ) . A revival of this production was planned for the reopening of the renovated Coliseum in 2004 , but delays in the refurbishment caused the revival to be postponed until 2006 . The ENO productions helped to revive interest in the work , and served as the basis of the Metropolitan Opera 's 2011 production . Peter Gelb , the Met 's general manager , had approached Adams in 2005 about staging his operas there . Gelb intended that Nixon in China be the first of such productions , but Adams chose Doctor Atomic to be the first Adams work to reach the Met . However , Gelb maintained his interest in staging Nixon in China , which received its Metropolitan premiere on February 2 , 2011 . The work received its BBC Proms debut at the Royal Albert Hall in London on September 5 , 2012 , although the second @-@ act ballet was omitted . 
 While a number of productions have used variations on the original staging , the February 2011 production by the Canadian Opera Company used an abstract setting revived from a 2004 production by the Opera Theatre of Saint Louis . Alluding to Nixon 's " News " aria , the omnipresence of television news was dramatized by set designer Allen Moyer by keeping a group of televisions onstage throughout much of the action , often showing scenes from the actual visit . Instead of an airplane descending in Act 1 , a number of televisions descended showing an airplane in flight . 
 Despite a recent proliferation of performances worldwide , the opera has not yet been shown in China . 
 Houston Grand Opera will again be producing the opera in 2017 on the 30th anniversary of the world premiere . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The original production in Houston received mixed reviews . Chicago Tribune critic John von Rhein called Nixon in China " an operatic triumph of grave and thought @-@ provoking beauty " . Houston Chronicle reviewer Ann Holmes said of the work , " The music of " Nixon " catches in your ear ; I find myself singing it while whizzing along the freeways . " Los Angeles Herald @-@ Examiner critic Mark Swed wrote that it would " bear relevance for as long as mankind cherished humanity " . Martin <unk> , writing in the Los Angeles Times , drew attention to the choreography of Morris ( " the trendy enfant terrible of modern dance " ) in the Act 2 ballet sequences . Morris had produced " one of those classical yet militaristic Sino @-@ Soviet ballets from the revolutionary repertory of Mme. Mao " . <unk> also praised " the subtle civility of Alice Goodman 's couplet @-@ dominated libretto " . 
 In a more critical vein , The New York Times chief music critic Donal Henahan alluded to the publicity buildup for the opera by opening his column , headed " That was it ? " , by calling the work " fluff " and " a Peter Sellars variety show , worth a few giggles but hardly a strong candidate for the standard repertory " . New York magazine Peter G. Davis admired Maddalena 's portrayal of the president , calling him " positively eerie . The tilt of his head , the jerky walk , the nervous hand movements , even the way he sits and crosses his legs are Nixon to the life " . However , Davis felt the opera had little chance of survival once the initial public attention ended . St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch critic James Wierzbicki called the opera " more interesting than good ... a novelty , not much more . " Television critic Marvin Kitman , just prior to the telecast of the original Houston production in April 1988 , stated " There are only three things wrong with Nixon in China . One , the libretto ; two , the music ; three , the direction . Outside of that , it 's perfect . " 
 The British premiere at the 1988 Edinburgh Festival brought critical praise : " Through its sheer cleverness , wit , lyrical beauty and sense of theater , it sweeps aside most of the criticism to which it lays itself open . " When the work was finally performed in London , 13 years after its Houston premiere and after a long period of theatrical neglect , Tempo 's critic Robert Stein responded to ENO 's 2000 production enthusiastically . He particularly praised the performance of Maddalena , and concluded that " Adams 's triumph ... consists really in taking a plot chock @-@ full of talk and public gesture , and through musical characterisation ... making a satisfying and engaging piece . " Of the ENO revival in 2006 , Erica <unk> of The Guardian wrote that " from its early visual coup with the arrival of the plane , Sellars ' production is an all @-@ too @-@ welcome reminder of his best form " . In <unk> 's view , the cast met admirably the challenge of presenting the work in a non @-@ satirical spirit . Reviewing the 2008 Portland Opera production ( the basis of the 2011 Canadian Opera Company presentation in Toronto ) , critic Patrick J. Smith concluded that " Nixon in China is a great American Opera . I suspected that it was a significant work when I saw it in 1987 ; I was ever more convinced of its stature when I heard it subsequently , on stage and on disc , and today I am certain that it is one of the small handful of operas that will survive . " 
 At the Met premiere in February 2011 , although the audience — which included Nixon 's daughter Tricia Nixon Cox — gave the work a warm reception , critical approval of the production was not uniform . Robert Hofler of Variety criticized Sellars for using body microphones to amplify the singing , thus compensating for the " vocally distressed " Maddalena . He further complained that the director , known for designing unorthodox settings for the operas he has staged ( Hofler mentions The Marriage of Figaro in the New York Trump Tower and Don Giovanni in an urban slum ) , here uses visually uninteresting , overly realistic sets for the first two acts . Hofler felt that it was time that the opera received a fresh approach : " Having finally arrived at the Met , Nixon in China has traveled the world . It is a masterpiece , a staple of the opera repertory , and now it simply deserves a new look " . However , Anthony Tommasini of The New York Times , while noting that Maddalena 's voice was not as strong as it had been at the world premiere , maintained that due to his long association with the role , it would have been impossible to bring the opera to the Met with anyone else as Nixon : " Maddalena inhabits the character like no other singer " . Tommasini also praised the performance of Robert Brubaker in the role of Mao , " captur [ ing ] the chairman 's authoritarian defiance and rapacious self @-@ indulgence " , and found the British soprano Janis Kelly " wonderful " as Pat Nixon . 
 Swed recalled the opera 's reception in 1987 while reviewing the Metropolitan Opera 's 2011 production : 
 An opera that was belittled in 1987 by major New York critics – as a CNN Opera of no lasting merit when Houston Grand Opera premiered it – has clearly remained relevant . Reaching the Met for the first time , it is now hailed as a classic . 
 = = Music = = 
 Nixon in China contains elements of minimalism . This musical style originated in the United States in the 1960s and is characterized by stasis and repetition in place of the melodic development associated with conventional music . Although Adams is associated with minimalism , the composer 's biographer , Sarah Cahill , asserts that of the composers classed as minimalists , Adams is " by far the most anchored in Western classical tradition " . 
 Timothy Johnson contends that Nixon in China goes beyond minimalism in important ways . Adams had been inspired , in developing his art , by minimalist composers such as Philip Glass , Steve Reich , and Terry Riley , and this is reflected in the work by repetitive rhythmic patterns . However , the opera 's complex harmonic structures are very different from the simpler ones in , for example , Glass 's Einstein on the Beach , which Adams terms " mindlessly repetitive " ; Johnson nevertheless considers the Glass opera an influence on Nixon in China . As Glass 's techniques did not allow Adams to accomplish what he wanted , he employed a system of constantly shifting metric organizational schemes to supplement the repeated rhythms in the opera . The music is marked by metrical dissonance , which occurs both for musical reasons and in response to the text of the opera . 
 The New York Times critic Allan Kozinn writes that with Nixon in China , Adams had produced a score that is both " minimalist and eclectic ... In the orchestral interludes one hears references , both passing and lingering , to everything from Wagner to Gershwin and Philip Glass . " In reviewing the first recording of the work , Gramophone 's critic discusses the mixture of styles and concludes that " minimalist the score emphatically is not " . Other commentators have evoked " neo @-@ classical Stravinsky " , and concocted the term " Mahler @-@ meets @-@ minimalism " , in attempts to pinpoint the opera 's idiom . 
 The opera is scored for an orchestra without bassoons , French horns , and tuba , but augmented by saxophones , pianos , and electronic synthesizer . The percussion section incorporates numerous special effects , including a wood block , sandpaper blocks , <unk> and sleigh bells . The work opens with an orchestral prelude of repetitive ascending phrases , after which a chorus of the Chinese military sings solemn couplets against a subdued instrumental background . This , writes Tommasini , creates " a hypnotic , quietly intense backdrop , pierced by fractured , brassy chords like some cosmic chorale " , in a manner reminiscent of Philip Glass . Tommasini contrasts this with the arrival of Nixon and his entourage , when the orchestra erupts with " big band bursts , <unk> riffs and shards of fanfares : a heavy din of momentous pomp " . Gramophone 's critic compares the sharply written exchanges between Nixon , Mao and Chou En @-@ lai with the seemingly aimless wandering of the melodic lines in the more reflective sections of the work , concluding that the music best serves the libretto in passages of rapid dialogue . Tommasini observes that Nixon 's own vocal lines reflect the real @-@ life president 's personal awkwardness and social unease . 
 The differences in perspective between East and West are set forth early in the first act , and underscored musically : while the Chinese of the chorus see the countryside as fields ready for harvest , the fruits of their labor and full of potential , the Nixons describe what they saw from the windows of the Spirit of ' 76 as a barren landscape . This gap is reflected in the music : the chorus for the workers is marked by what Johnson terms " a wide @-@ ranging palette of harmonic colors " , the Western perspective is shown by the " quick , descending , dismissive cadential gesture " which follows Nixon 's description of his travels . 
 The second act opens with warm and reflective music culminating in Pat Nixon 's tender aria " This is prophetic " . The main focus of the act , however , is the Chinese revolutionary opera @-@ ballet , The Red Detachment of Women , " a riot of clashing styles " according to Tommasini , reminiscent of agitprop theatre with added elements of Strauss waltzes , blasts of jazz and 1930s Stravinsky . The internal opera is followed by a monologue , " I am the wife of Mao Tse @-@ tung " in which Chiang Ch 'ing , Mao 's wife , rails against counterrevolutionary elements in full coloratura soprano mode that culminates in a high D , appropriate for a character who in real life was a former actress given to self @-@ dramatization . Critic Thomas May notes that , in the third act , her " pose as a power @-@ hungry Queen of the Night gives way to wistful regret " . In this final , " surreal " act the concluding thoughts of Chou En @-@ lai are described by Tommasini as " deeply affecting " . The act incorporates a brief foxtrot episode , choreographed by Morris , illustrating Pat Nixon 's memories of her youth in the 1930s . 
 Critic Robert Stein identifies Adams 's particular strengths in his orchestral writing as " motoring , brassy figures and sweetly reflective string and woodwind harmonies " , a view echoed by Gregory Carpenter in the liner notes to the 2009 Naxos recording of the opera . Carpenter pinpoints Adams 's " uncanny talent for recognising the dramatic possibilities of continually repeating melodies , harmonies and rhythms " , and his ability to change the mix of these elements to reflect the onstage action . The feel of the Nixon era is recreated through popular music references ; Sellars has observed that some of the music associated with Nixon is derived from the big band sound of the late 1930s , when the Nixons fell in love . Other commentators have noted Adams 's limitations as a melodist , and his reliance for long stretches on what critic Donal Henahan has described as " a prosaically chanted recitative style " . However , Robert Hugill , reviewing the 2006 English National Opera revival , found that the sometimes tedious " endless arpeggios " are often followed by gripping music which immediately re @-@ engages the listener 's interest . This verdict contrasts with that of Davis after the original Houston performance ; Davis commented that Adams ' inexperience as an opera writer was evident in often " turgid instrumentation " , and that at points where " the music must be the crucial and defining element ... Adams fails to do the job " . 
 = = List of arias and musical sequences = = 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Nixon in China has been recorded twice , the first time by Nonesuch Records in 1987 , with the full Houston premiere cast in their original roles . In this recording , Edo de Waart conducted the Orchestra of St. Luke 's and chorus . Gramophone 's Good DVD Guide praised the singing , specifically mentioning James Maddalena 's " aptly volatile Nixon " and Trudy Ellen Craney 's admirable delivery of Chiang Ch 'ing 's coloratura passages . This recording received a Grammy Award in 1988 for Best Contemporary Composition in the " Classical " category ; it was reissued in February 2011 , coinciding with the opera 's production at the Metropolitan Opera . The second recording was issued in 2008 by Naxos . Marin Alsop conducted the Colorado Symphony Orchestra and Opera Colorado Chorus , with Robert Orth as Nixon , Maria <unk> as Pat Nixon , Thomas Hammons as Kissinger , Chen @-@ Ye Yuan as Chou En @-@ lai , Marc Heller as Mao Tse @-@ Tung and Tracy Dahl as Chiang Ch <unk> 
 = = In Other Media = = 
 " The People are the heroes now " and " The Chairman Dances : Foxtrot for Orchestra " both make an appearance in the modern era soundtrack of the <unk> acclaimed Sid Meier 's Civilization IV . 
 = Ye Qianyu = 
 Ye Qianyu ( or Yeh Ch 'ien @-@ <unk> ; 31 March 1907 – 5 May 1995 ) was a Chinese painter and pioneering manhua artist . In 1928 , he cofounded Shanghai Manhua , one of the earliest and most influential manhua magazines , and created Mr. Wang , one of China 's most famous comic strips . 
 Ye was also a master of traditional Chinese painting and served as the head of the Department of Chinese Painting of the China Central Academy of Fine Arts . During the Cultural Revolution he was persecuted and imprisoned for seven years . 
 Ye was married three times . His first two marriages , to Luo Caiyun and dancer Dai Ailian , ended in divorce . His third marriage , to movie star Wang Renmei , lasted more than 30 years until Wang 's death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ye Qianyu was born Ye <unk> ( <unk> ) in <unk> county , Zhejiang province in 1907 . Although he loved to paint since childhood , he had neither the money nor the opportunity to seek professional training , forcing him to teach himself how to paint . 
 = = Career in Shanghai = = 
 At age 18 Ye moved to Shanghai , where he found work at a small , short @-@ lived journal <unk> <unk> ( Three Day Pictorial ) . The journal shut down when Chiang Kai @-@ shek 's Northern Expedition army reached Shanghai in April 1927 . 
 Out of work , Ye Qianyu , then 20 years old , together with fellow cartoonists Huang <unk> and Lu <unk> released a publication dedicated to manhua , called Shanghai Manhua ( or Shanghai Sketch ) . The first effort looked like a propaganda poster and was a failure . Undeterred , the original three , joined by eight more artists including Zhang Guangyu , Ding Song , and Wang <unk> , formed the Shanghai Sketch Society ( also translated as Shanghai Cartoon Association ) in the autumn of 1927 . It was China 's first association dedicated to manhua , and its debut was a major event in the history of Chinese comics . 
 Under the leadership of Zhang Guangyu , who recruited the wealthy poet Shao <unk> as a sponsor , the association successfully relaunched the Shanghai Manhua on 21 April 1928 . Ye drew several covers for the magazine and the back page of the publication carried his comic strip , Mr. Wang . Inspired by the American strip Bringing Up Father and portraying the daily life of the middle and lower classes of Shanghai , Mr. Wang became one of China 's most famous cartoons , eventually being made into 11 films in the 1930s and 40s . 
 In June 1930 Shanghai Manhua was merged into Modern <unk> ( or Modern Pictorial , <unk> ) , of which Ye became an editor while continuing his Mr. Wang series . 
 In September 1936 , Ye Qianyu , Lu <unk> , and Zhang Guangyu organized the First National Cartoon Exhibition in Shanghai . It displayed over 600 cartoons from all over the country . After the overwhelming success of the exhibition , the artists formed the National Association of Chinese Cartoonists in the spring of 1937 . The blossoming movement , however , was brought to a halt by the Japanese invasion a few months later . 
 = = Sino @-@ Japanese War = = 
 When Japan invaded China and occupied Shanghai in 1937 , Ye Qianyu , together with a group of fellow Shanghai cartoonists , formed the " National Salvation Cartoon Propaganda Corps " , which included well @-@ known artists Zhang <unk> , Lu <unk> , Te Wei , and Hu Kao . Funded by the Kuomintang government , the corps left Shanghai for the interior to spread anti @-@ Japanese propaganda . They first went to Wuhan , but were forced to leave when that city fell at the end of 1938 . They then travelled to Changsha , Guilin , and eventually to the wartime capital Chongqing . They published 15 issues of Resistance Cartoons before the government discontinued funding . 
 Ye went to Hong Kong prior to its fall to the Japanese in December 1941 , and traveled through Guizhou , Guangxi , and Vietnam . In 1943 he temporarily worked for the US General Joseph Stilwell as a war correspondent in India . Throughout his travels he drew many sketches of wartime scenes , including a series entitled Escape from Hong Kong . 
 = = After World War II = = 
 After the Japanese surrender in 1945 , Ye Qianyu went to the United States , where he held a series of exhibitions to show and sell his artworks . 
 In 1947 , Ye became a professor at the Beiping ( Beijing ) Art Academy . After the founding of the People 's Republic of China in 1949 , he remained at the academy , which was transformed into the China Central Academy of Fine Arts . He was also elected vice @-@ chairman of the China Artists Association . In 1954 , he was appointed head of the Chinese Painting Department of the academy . He painted prolifically in the 1950s , including such representative works as Indian Dancing , Autumn of the Summer River , and The Liberation of Beiping . 
 When the Cultural Revolution began in 1966 , Ye Qianyu was accused of being a Kuomintang ( KMT ) agent for having drawn propaganda paintings and cartoons for the KMT government during the Japanese invasion . The Red Guards labeled him as a KMT " Major General " because he was better paid than a real general . He was imprisoned for seven years . After his release in 1975 , he was allowed to return to work at the Central Academy of Fine Arts , as a janitor . He nearly died of a heart attack the following year , and underwent a major operation in 1978 . His wife Wang Renmei supported the family during this period . 
 Ye Qianyu was politically rehabilitated in 1979 . In 1981 he was appointed Vice President of the Research Institute of Chinese painting , and re @-@ elected vice @-@ chairman of the China Artists Association and member of the National Committee of the CPPCC . He died in 1995 in Beijing , aged 88 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Ye Qianyu was married three times . At age 23 , he married Luo Caiyun ( <unk> ) , who was from a prominent family in his hometown <unk> . It was a loveless marriage arranged by their parents . She gave birth to a son Ye Shen ( <unk> ) and a daughter Ye <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 In 1935 , while he was an editor with the Modern Sketch magazine , Ye fell in love with Liang <unk> ( <unk> ) , one of the first female Chinese cartoonists and creator of the comic strip Miss Bee . Luo Caiyun rejected Ye 's request for divorce , but they signed an agreement to officially separate . 
 At the start of the Sino @-@ Japanese War , Liang <unk> joined Ye 's Salvation Cartoon Propaganda Corps and went to Wuhan with him . However , Liang met and fell in love with an air force pilot in Wuhan , eventually following him to Taiwan . She suffered from mental illness in her later years and committed suicide in around 1970 . 
 In 1940 Ye Qianyu met the dancer Dai Ailian in Hong Kong . An overseas Chinese born in Trinidad , Dai had come to Hong Kong to support the war effort . Although Dai could not speak Chinese and Ye spoke little English , they fell in love and got married within a few weeks . Soong Ching @-@ ling , the widow of President Sun Yat @-@ sen , presided over their wedding . Because of a botched surgery in Hong Kong , Dai was unable to have children . According to Ye Qianyu 's daughter <unk> , who lived with her father and was initially hostile to her stepmother , Dai treated her as if she had been her own child . 
 In 1950 Ye spent more than half a year in Xinjiang . When he returned to Beijing , Dai Ailian unexpectedly asked for divorce , because she had fallen in love with her dance partner . Ye was devastated ; the divorce was finalized in 1951 . Dai Ailian lived until 2006 , and is now known as the " Mother of Chinese ballet " . 
 Ye 's last wife was Wang Renmei , a famous actress who had been previously married to the " Film Emperor " Jin Yan . Introduced by mutual friends , they got married in 1955 . The marriage was stormy from the beginning , but it lasted more than 30 years , through the turmoil of the Cultural Revolution , until Wang 's death in 1987 . 
 Luo Caiyun , Ye Qianyu 's first wife , lived with their son Ye Shen in Wuxi , Jiangsu . When Ye Qianyu was accused of being a KMT agent and thrown into prison during the Cultural Revolution , Luo was persecuted for being his ex @-@ wife . She committed suicide in 1970 . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 = Dunston Power Station = 
 Sometimes confused with the nearby Stella power stations . 
 Dunston Power Station refers to a pair of adjacent coal @-@ fired power stations in the North East of England , now demolished . They were built on the south bank of the River Tyne , in the western outskirts of Dunston in Gateshead . The two stations were built on a site which is now occupied by the MetroCentre . The first power station built on the site was known as Dunston A Power Station , and the second , which gradually replaced it between 1933 and 1950 , was known as Dunston B Power Station . The A Station was , in its time , one of the largest in the country , and as well as burning coal had early open cycle gas turbine units . The B Station was the first of a new power station design , and stood as a landmark in the Tyne for over 50 years . From the A Station 's opening in 1910 until the B Station 's demolition in 1986 , they collectively operated from the early days of electricity generation in the United Kingdom , through the industry 's nationalisation , and until a decade before its privatisation . 
 Dunston A had a generating capacity of 48 @.@ 85 megawatts ( MW ) in 1955 , and Dunston B had a generating capacity of 300 MW . Electricity from the stations powered an area covering Northumberland , County Durham , Cumberland , Yorkshire and as far north as Galashiels in Scotland . 
 = = Dunston A Power Station = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 With the expansion of the electric supply industry in the early 1900s , power stations were built to supply homes with electric lighting . Around Newcastle upon Tyne this led to the construction of power stations at Lemington , The Close and Carville . Two supply companies built the stations , the Newcastle @-@ upon @-@ Tyne Electric Supply Company ( NESCo ) to the east of Newcastle , and the Newcastle and District Electric Lighting Company ( DisCo ) to the west . To meet an increasing demand for electricity , NESCo commissioned Dunston Power Station ( later Dunston A Power Station ) on the Derwent Haugh , a large flood plain to the west of Gateshead , to balance the supply of the Newcastle area with the Carville station . Construction of the new station began in 1908 , the work undertaken by the company of Sir Robert McAlpine . They completed the construction in the short time of 20 months , and this was to be their first in a large number of power station constructions , following the decline of the railway industry . In 1910 , the station was opened and began generating electricity . 
 = = = Design and specification = = = 
 The station was of a similar design to other local power stations at Carville and Lemington , and was a large triple @-@ gabled brick building . However Dunston A was built several years after the other local stations , and so because of advances in power station design , was larger and was able to produce more electricity than the others . The station was originally equipped with two turbo @-@ alternators rated at 7 @.@ 2 megawatts ( MW ) , made by AEG of Germany , and two turbo alternators rated at 6 @.@ 25 MW and 13 @.@ 2 MW , made by Brown Boveri of Switzerland , for a total generating capacity of 33 @.@ 85 MW . The turbo alternators were supplied with steam from 24 coal burning Babcock & Wilcox marine water @-@ tube boilers . 
 = = = = Low temperature <unk> plant = = = = 
 In 1925 , NESCo set up separate plant at the power station for the low temperature <unk> treatment of coal , before being burned in boilers and the steam used for electricity generation . The treatment plant was manufactured by Babcock & Wilcox , and set up in a self @-@ contained boiler house which contained four boilers , four retorts and pulverising mills . The building was also fitted with gas @-@ stripping and by @-@ product plants . The <unk> plant could handle up to 100 tonnes of coal per day , while its boilers produced 78 @,@ 000 lb of steam per hour . This plant was extended in 1931 . 
 = = = = Gas turbine plant = = = = 
 Between 1947 and November 1955 , the station was extended , and a 15 MW Parsons gas turbine turbo alternator was installed , bringing the capacity of the station up to 48 @.@ 85 MW . The gas was supplied by pipe line from the Norwood Coke Works , 1 @.@ 5 mi ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) away in the Team Valley . 
 = = Dunston B Power Station = = 
 As part of a transition from the 40 Hertz ( Hz ) system , used by the Newcastle @-@ upon @-@ Tyne Electric Supply Company , to the 50 Hz system , used by the new UK National Grid , which took place in 1932 , a new power station was built to replace the A power station . 
 = = = Design and specification = = = 
 The new Dunston B Power Station was designed by consulting engineers Merz & McLellan . Its design was different from the design of other power stations at the time because it enclosed the machinery in a steel frame clad with glass . This was a departure from the usual power station designs , which normally enclosed the machinery in a concrete or brick wall . Dunston B is thought to be the first power station in the UK and possibly even the world to be built in this way . The station was also the first in the world to use metal clad switchgear at a voltage as high as 66 @,@ 000 V. 
 Construction of the new power station started in 1930 , but the Second World War delayed its full completion until 1951 . The station was opened in stages throughout its construction , as generating units were able to be put into production while the other sections were still under construction . The first units were commissioned in January 1933 . 
 The new station had a capacity of 300 megawatts ( MW ) , produced by six 50 MW generating sets . These were made by C. A. Parsons and Company and were the largest machines ever constructed under Charles Algernon Parsons ' supervision . 
 The station 's units were the first application of reheated steam in steam turbines in the world , an improvement which gave them a heat consumption of only 9 @,@ 280 BTU per kilowatt hour , the most efficient system in the UK . In 1939 the station was said to be " at the head of all the Power Stations in Great Britain as regards thermal efficiency . " The station remained one of Britain 's most efficient systems until the 1950s . 
 The stations ' buildings were around 100 ft ( 30 m ) tall . Flue gas was discharged through six 250 ft ( 76 m ) tall chimneys , one for each of the station 's six generating units . The station was fitted with two electrostatic precipitators in 1953 , one completed in June that year and the other in September . They were fitted to reduce smoke and pollution from the station . 
 = = = Operations = = = 
 The plant 's water system was cooled by using the nearby River Tyne , rather than using a cooling tower system . Coal for the station was supplied from various coal mines in the North Durham coalfields , and was brought to the station by train , on what was a freight only line . Since the station 's closure , this line has been upgraded for use by passenger trains and is now used as part of the Newcastle and Carlisle Railway . Once delivered to the station , coal was shunted by CEGB No. 15 " Eustace Forth " , which was built by Robert Stephenson and Hawthorns in 1942 , and No. 13 " The Barra " , which was built by Hawthorn Leslie & Company in 1928 . These two engines are now stored at Shildon Locomotion Museum and Tanfield Railway respectively . 
 Various ships disposed of the station 's ash waste , by carrying the fly ash down the river and dumping it in the North Sea . These vessels included " Bobby Shaftoe " , " Bessie Surtees " and " Hexhamshire Lass " , which were also used by the nearby Stella power stations ; as well as a number of tugs towing hopper barges , including " Mildred " . 
 = = Closure , demolition and present = = 
 See also MetroCentre ( shopping centre ) 
 In its time , Dunston B Power Station ranked consistently in England 's leading stations , both in terms of thermal efficiency and cost per unit of electricity . However , the station eventually became outdated , and notification of its partial closure was given in October 1975 , with some units being closed the following October . It was then only used as a stand @-@ by station , operating only at peak electrical demand times . Finally , after some units having been in operation for about 40 years , the station ceased to generate electricity on 26 October 1981 . At the time of closure , only 98 MW of the station 's capacity was in use . 
 The station was demolished in 1986 to make way for the MetroCentre , which became Europe 's largest shopping and leisure centre . The land on which the MetroCentre was built was bought for only £ 100 @,@ 000 , because the site was water @-@ logged and had been used for dumping ash produced by the power station . American warehouse club chain Costco have since built a store on the actual site of the power station . The power station 's large indoor sub @-@ station still stands alongside it , as the only trace of the site 's former use . 
 Due to the closure of Dunston power station , along with the later closures of the power stations at Stella and Blyth , the northern part of North East England has become heavily dependent upon the National Grid for electrical supply . However , in the south of the region there are still two large power stations at Hartlepool and Teesside , meaning that the south of the region does not depend upon the National Grid for electrical supply as much as the north of the region . 
 = = Visual and cultural impact = = 
 The power station 's six chimneys were a prominent local landmark , visible from along a 8 @.@ 6 @-@ mile ( 13 @.@ 8 km ) stretch of the Tyne valley running from Bensham in Gateshead to Heddon @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Wall in Northumberland . 
 When in operation , the B station briefly featured in Get Carter , a 1971 crime film starring Michael Caine . Dunston B appears as part of the film 's backdrop , viewed from the now demolished Frank Street in Benwell , as the funeral cortège of the main character 's brother Frank leaves a house on the street . 
 The station was also a popular subject for photographers . It featured in the work of documentary and press photographer Bert Hardy , who photographed it from Benwell , using it as a backdrop whilst photographing a mother and child . It was also photographed by Welsh documentary photographer Jimmy Forsyth ( photographer ) as part of his Scotswood Road collection . 
 = Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep = 
 Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep ( Japanese : キングダム ハーツ <unk> <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : Kingudamu Hātsu <unk> bai <unk> ) is an action role @-@ playing game developed and published by Square Enix for the PlayStation Portable , serving as the sixth installment in the Kingdom Hearts series . The game was released on UMD in Japan on January 9 , 2010 , in North America on September 7 , 2010 and in the PAL regions on September 10 , 2010 . An international version of the game titled Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep Final Mix was released in Japan in January 2011 featuring the changes made in the non @-@ Japanese versions . 
 The game utilizes an overhauled battle system different from previous games in the series with new elements . It is a prequel to the original Kingdom Hearts , taking place nine years before . The game centers on the journeys of Terra , Aqua and Ventus , characters briefly featured in Kingdom Hearts II in their quest to locate the missing Master Xehanort , and protect the worlds from creatures known as the Unversed . The player has access to the three characters ' different scenarios when playing . 
 Development of the game began in June 2005 with parts of the game Kingdom Hearts II Final Mix meant to bring clues of Birth by Sleep . The game was directed by Tetsuya Nomura and co @-@ directed by Tai Yasue . Nomura has referred to the game as " Episode 0 " ( and later " Episode 0 @.@ 1 " ) saying that the game is on the same scale and plays as big an importance as Kingdom Hearts and Kingdom Hearts II . The game has been well @-@ received , selling 1 @.@ 27 million copies worldwide as of November 2010 , and receiving positive comments by video game publications . Critics praised the gameplay , graphics , music , and storyline of the game , with criticism reserved for the level design and the characters . A high definition version of the Final Mix edition was released for the PlayStation 3 in 2014 as a part of the Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix collection . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Birth by Sleep is an action role @-@ playing game that introduces a gameplay aspect to the series called the Command System . This system allows players to customize a Command Deck with techniques and abilities that they can perform at will , called Deck Commands . Performing ordinary attacks and Commands fills a gauge displayed above the Command Deck . When certain requirements are fulfilled and the gauge is full , the player 's basic attack is changed to the " Surge " Command , which racks up powerful combos depending on what Command Style is activated . Filling the gauge a second time replaces the " Surge " Command with the more powerful " Storm " Command . 
 Unlike previous games in the series , the game does not utilize Magic Points ( MP ) for spells or magic casting . It instead uses a system known as Focus , which is displayed in an orange gauge on the interface . The player can use Focus to perform a technique called <unk> with which the player enters a first person mode where they target enemies to cast homing spells that differ with each character and technique , depleting the gauge relative to the number of enemies targeted . Once depleted , the Focus gauge gradually refills with every attack and Deck Command the player lands on an enemy . 
 Another aspect introduced in the game is the Dimension Link ( D @-@ Link ) , measured in a blue gauge on the interface . It is used to draw power from certain companions who the player characters meet during the game , such as Experiment 626 , temporarily replacing the commands in the player 's customized command deck with a pre @-@ determined set of commands that differ with each D @-@ Link . Once the command gauge is filled while performing a D @-@ Link , a powerful finishing move is activated to take out enemies . Each finishing move has two levels which can render a finishing move more powerful than before , similar to that of the Command System . The D @-@ Link can only be used when its corresponding gauge is filled completely , and can be activated by pressing right on the directional pad to access the D @-@ Link menu , followed by selecting the chosen ally . 
 The game also features the Command Board , which appears whenever the player completes a world , and can be accessed from save points and the world map once unlocked . Each world has its own unique Command Board with its own tricks and mechanisms . The Command Board plays like a simplified version of the Fortune Street board game series . A die is thrown and the player moves , with each space having its own unique effect on the player . Various Disney characters from throughout the game also appear on their respective Command Board to either aid or hinder the player . Special panels in the board game can trigger " special events " when landed on by the player . 
 = = = Scenarios = = = 
 The game is divided into three separate scenarios , with each scenario surrounding the story of the three main characters : Terra , Aqua , and Ventus . While the first ten minutes of the story are the same regardless of which character is chosen , the events that follow differ in each scenario , with each character 's narrative occurring parallel to the others . The gameplay of each scenario differs based on the abilities of each character such as their power , speed and magic : Terra is the most powerful in terms of physical damage , Ventus is the fastest character , and Aqua specializes in magic . Players may choose which of the three scenarios they wish to start with near the beginning of the game . The recommended scenario order of play by Nomura is Terra , followed by Ventus , and lastly Aqua , allowing the player to best understand the story . Completing all three scenarios will unlock the story 's final chapter . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 The game supports up to six players at a time in four new multiplayer modes , all set in a world known as the Mirage Arena . In each mode , players control one of the three main characters . In Versus , players fight against each other in a deathmatch @-@ style game , while in Arena players fight co @-@ operatively in a " Survival Mode " style of gameplay against wave after wave of Unversed . Rumble Racing features players racing against each other competitively on their Keyblade vehicles , which can also be used to attack rivals . Command Board is a board game using the in @-@ game Command Board mechanic , where players try to reach the end first as in traditional board games . Setting records in the Mirage Arena earns players medals which can be exchanged for rare items in @-@ game . Only Ad @-@ Hoc wireless multiplayer , where all of the players need to be physically near each other , is allowed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Birth by Sleep is a prequel to the first Kingdom Hearts game , taking place nine years prior . Like the other games in the series , the player progresses through a collection of various worlds , based on various locales from the Disney animated features canon : Dwarf Woodlands from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , Enchanted Dominion from Sleeping Beauty , Castle of Dreams from Cinderella , Olympus Coliseum from Hercules , Deep Space from Lilo & Stitch , Neverland from Peter Pan , and Mysterious Tower from Fantasia . The game also features various new worlds specially created for the series by Square Enix such as the Land of Departure and Radiant Garden . Disney Town , which is the town that surrounds the castle grounds of Disney Castle , serves as the game 's minigame world . Worlds such as Destiny Islands and Castle Oblivion also appear in the form of cutscenes , while the 100 Acre Wood from the Winnie the Pooh franchise , which had appeared in most other games of the series , only appears as a Command Board in Birth by Sleep . The staff first chose the worlds based on the game 's scenario , leading to the inclusion of Princesses ' worlds . They then added the worlds of Neverland and Deep Space to add variety to the game , while Olympus Coliseum was selected to reflect the game 's earlier setting compared to the original Kingdom Hearts . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The three main characters are Terra , Aqua , and Ventus , a trio of apprentice Keyblade wielders under Master Eraqus who aspire to become Masters themselves . Another Keyblade Master , Xehanort , and his apprentice , Vanitas , serve as the game 's antagonists . Other characters from the previous games return , such as Sora , Riku , and Kairi , though they are younger than their original incarnations and given less prominent roles . A number of characters who later come to form Organization XIII also appear in their human forms . As with the Heartless in Kingdom Hearts and the Nobodies in Kingdom Hearts II , Birth by Sleep introduces a new type of enemy : the Unversed , fledgling emotions that are " not well @-@ versed in their own existences " and feed on negativity . 
 As with the other games in the series , Birth by Sleep features an extensive cast of Disney characters . The most prominent of these characters is King Mickey , who serves as a student under the sorcerer Yen Sid at this point in the series chronology . Donald Duck and Goofy , who assist Sora in most other games , appear in smaller roles . Most other Disney characters remain in their respective worlds regardless of their overall importance to the story in previous installments , such as Maleficent and Pete , who served as major antagonists between Kingdom Hearts and Kingdom Hearts II , and a number of the Princesses of Heart . Some characters ( such as Experiment 626 , Prince Phillip , and King Mickey ) occasionally fight alongside the player characters in battles as partners similar to the other games , providing assistance and performing combos to help the player proceed . However , they do not follow the player around constantly like Donald and Goofy in the other games . Unlike the other major installments , which also featured casts of various characters throughout the Final Fantasy series , Birth by Sleep only features two of these characters : Zack from Final Fantasy VII , and Moogle , a creature from several of the Final Fantasy games , who sells items to the player . As Birth by Sleep is a prequel of the first Kingdom Hearts title , the staff decided to add Zack to the title as he is the protagonist of the Final Fantasy VII prequel , Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 In the Land of Departure , Terra and Aqua take an exam to achieve the Mark of Mastery . Master Xehanort manipulates the test so only Aqua passes while Terra fails , lessening the control of darkness in his heart . Shortly after the test , Xehanort disappears and a horde of mysterious creatures called the Unversed begin to appear throughout the worlds in pursuit of the Princesses of Heart . Learning of these developments from Yen Sid , Master Eraqus sends Terra and Aqua to destroy the Unversed and find Xehanort throughout the countless worlds . Meanwhile , Ventus is coaxed by Xehanort 's apprentice Vanitas into following Terra against Eraqus ' wishes , while Eraqus orders Aqua to watch over Terra and bring Ventus back to the Land of Departure . 
 As the three travel through several worlds , Terra attracts the attention of several villains : Maleficent , Hades , Dr. <unk> <unk> , Captain Hook , and the Wicked Queen who offer him the whereabouts of Xehanort in exchange for assistance in their own agendas . He eventually finds Xehanort , who instructs him to destroy Vanitas , revealed to be the source of the Unversed created from the darkness extracted from Ventus ' heart . The three friends briefly reunite at Radiant Garden where Aqua and Ventus confront Terra about his actions , but he dismisses them . 
 Ventus later encounters Xehanort , who reveals his intentions to fuse Ventus and Vanitas 's hearts to create an all @-@ powerful Keyblade called the χ @-@ blade . Xehanort sends Ventus to the Land of Departure to confront Eraqus , who tries to kill Ventus to foil Xehanort 's plans . However , Terra , who has also been sent to the Land of Departure by Xehanort , faces Eraqus to protect Ventus . Upon his defeat , Eraqus is vanquished by Xehanort , who covers the Land of Departure in darkness and tells Terra to go to a world known as the Keyblade Graveyard . Ventus is similarly instructed to do the same by Vanitas , as is Aqua by Yen Sid after he informs her of Eraqus ' fate . 
 Terra , Aqua , and Ventus gather at the Keyblade Graveyard , where Xehanort appears with Vanitas and reveals his plan to use the χ @-@ blade to unlock Kingdom Hearts and start a Keyblade War , an apocalyptic event that nearly destroyed the world in the past . Terra 's heart is swallowed by darkness in the ensuing battle , allowing Xehanort to take over his body , but Terra 's mind remains within his discarded suit of armor , which comes to life and defeats Xehanort . Meanwhile , Ventus is forced to fuse with Vanitas to create the χ @-@ blade and battles Aqua alongside Mickey , Yen Sid 's apprentice , while he engages Vanitas in a metaphysical battle within his mind . Aqua destroys the χ @-@ blade as Ventus defeats Vanitas from within , though Ventus loses his heart and falls into a deep sleep as a result . 
 After learning of Ventus ' state , Aqua brings his body to the Land of Departure , where she transforms it into Castle Oblivion to ensure Ventus will not be disturbed . She then goes to Radiant Garden where she fights Xehanort , who still possesses Terra 's body . The battle rages until Xehanort unlocks his own heart after Terra 's heart tries to regain control of his body . Terra 's body sinks into the realm of darkness , and Aqua dives in to save him , becoming trapped . Xehanort , who remains in Terra 's body , loses his memories and is found by Ansem the Wise , while Ventus ' heart reconnects to the heart of a young Sora where it is able to rest . 
 In the game 's secret ending , which takes place after the events of Kingdom Hearts II , Aqua meets Ansem the Wise in the Realm of Darkness and learns from him about Sora , who has the power to save those connected to his heart . Sora , having learned of their fates from King Mickey 's letter , undertakes another quest to save them . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development of the game began in June 2005 and was originally intended for the PlayStation 2 with Sora as the prototype protagonist of the game . Birth by Sleep was developed by Square Enix 's fifth Product Development Division , based in Osaka , the same team behind Kingdom Hearts Re : Chain of Memories , and uses the same graphical engine as both Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII and Dissidia Final Fantasy . During development of Kingdom Hearts II , the Osaka @-@ based team had requested to be involved in a spin @-@ off if one were to be made . Development of the game began before the release of Kingdom Hearts II Final Mix + . The plot was completed , but development was halted six months after it began due to development of Re : Chain of Memories . When development resumed , the team changed the platform to the PlayStation Portable so as to make use of the PSP 's functions such as co @-@ operative and competitive multiplayer gameplay . The title of the game is based on II Final Mix 's secret ending , " Birth by Sleep " , a title which director Tetsuya Nomura developed as he wanted a phrase having " by " as well as to use an English title like previous games . Nomura has referred to the game as " Episode 0 " , saying that the game is on the same scale and plays as big an importance as Kingdom Hearts and Kingdom Hearts II . 
 Early during the game 's development , Nomura already had various scenes in mind such as Terra 's and Riku 's conversation in order to explain the latter 's ability in the original games . Various parts from the plot had to be modified to make the game more light @-@ hearted such as Eraqus ' death at the hands of Xehanort after being defeated by Terra , how Aqua 's scenario was supposed to end with her already trapped in the Realm of Darkness , and the relationship between Ventus and Sora . Two of the newly introduced protagonists , Ventus and Terra , were based on other characters from the franchise while Aqua 's design did not have a base . Nevertheless , the three wear outfits meant to expand the student @-@ and @-@ teacher bond shown in the game . The Disney worlds were chosen to expand the characters of the <unk> of Light as well as <unk> 's who are connected with the events of the first Kingdom Hearts game , while the worlds of Neverland and Deep Space were chosen to add variety to the game , and Olympus Coliseum was selected to reflect the game 's earlier setting compared to the original Kingdom Hearts . 
 Birth by Sleep was directed by Nomura and co @-@ directed by Tai Yasue . It was announced alongside Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days and Kingdom Hearts coded at the Tokyo Game Show on September 20 , 2007 , where a trailer was shown in a photo @-@ prohibited theater . New trailers were shown at the 2008 Jump Festa in December 2007 and the DKΣ3713 Private Party , an invite @-@ only event by Square Enix for fans , in August 2008 ; a playable demo was also available at DKΣ3713 . The June 5 , 2009 issue of Famitsu covered an interview with Tetsuya Nomura , where he said that the game was , at the time , at the voice recording stage . Nomura also confirmed in an interview that Birth by Sleep would contain a secret ending like in Kingdom Hearts and Kingdom Hearts II for the next game in the Kingdom Hearts series , which he confirmed to be a main game and the one which Nomura stated would link up Birth by Sleep , 358 / 2 Days and coded . He also confirmed that a Birth by Sleep demo would indeed be playable at the 2009 Tokyo Games Show together with a new trailer . In early October 2009 , Nomura revealed that the concept of the Command Board originated from when he was in elementary school as at that time he was very fascinated with board games and even made his own ; hence he wanted to incorporate a fun board game into the game . 
 In late October 2009 , Nomura revealed that he was currently designing the cover art for Birth by Sleep as well as editing the staff rolls due to there being three main characters in the game . He also revealed that they were editing the new opening movie for the game . As with coded and 358 / 2 Days , Yoko Shimomura , the series ' main composer , composed the most prominent themes , while the rest was created by other composers . Like Kingdom Hearts and Kingdom Hearts Re : Chain of Memories , Birth by Sleep uses Hikaru Utada 's theme song " Hikari " for the Japanese version and its English version , " Simple and Clean " , in the other releases . 
 The game made its final public appearance before its Japanese release at Jump Festa 2010 on December 19 , 2009 where a playable demo as well as new footage from the game were present and shown . Like previous console titles in the series , the game contains a secret movie at the end , which had been described as being more like a " true ending " rather than a teaser for the future like previous ones . Development of the movie began in October where Nomura noted in the blog that the game would contain a teaser to the next major Kingdom Hearts game similar to the teasers in previous games in the series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game sold very well during its first two days of release with over 500 @,@ 000 copies of the game sold in Japan . By February 14 , just over a month later , the game had sold a total of 800 @,@ 551 copies . Sales in North America and Europe have also been good , with the game taking high places in various categories . After its release in the United States , it was listed as the sixth bestselling video game there in September 2010 by the NPD Group . By November 2010 , the game had sold 1 @.@ 27 million units worldwide with 310 @,@ 000 and 190 @,@ 000 copies coming from North America and Europe , respectively , and the rest from Japan . 
 Prior to the game 's release , IGN expressed their excitement at the release of the game in 2010 having played the demo . 1UP.com echoed similar statements , praising the visuals and stating it " plays better " than the previous Kingdom Hearts games . They had some complaints regarding Ven 's demo due to constant jumping , but further stated that Ven 's demo gave them an idea of " how the game is going to feel " , and predicted the game would improve the series . 1UP also put it on their article " Top 10 PSP Games of 2010 " , while Gamasutra put it in their " The Most Anticipated Games Of 2010 " and " The Most @-@ <unk> Games Of 2009 : PlayStation Portable " articles . IGN featured it as nominated of 2010 's " Best of E3 Award " in the category Best PSP Games . GameTrailers also had praise for the new title and gave it a nomination for Best PSP Game of E3 2010 . 
 Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep has received positive reviews from gaming reviewers . The game 's average score is of 82 out of 100 on Metacritic and GameRankings , becoming the third highest ranking Kingdom Hearts game behind Kingdom Hearts and Kingdom Hearts II . The game has been highly praised by Japanese gaming magazine , Famitsu , whose four reviewers gave scores of 10 / 9 / 9 / 9 , for a total of 37 / 40 , the third @-@ highest rated game in the Kingdom Hearts series behind Dream Drop Distance and Kingdom Hearts II . They praised the game 's graphics and music , calling them " superb " , as well as praising the wide variety of customization available to the players due to the three unique playable characters . It also praised the design of boss battles , calling them " lively and exciting " . English websites have also given praise to the game with GameZone calling it " amazing title that every KH fan must play " , finding it the best portable game from the series . RPGamer praised the " evolution " from the gameplay ever since the series ' start . PlayStation : The Official Magazine ( PSM ) agreed calling the fighting system " one of the deepest , most rewarding " ones from the PSP . IGN called its battle system " unique " , labeling it as the best one from all the series and having a campaign story . 1UP praised the differences between the protagonists ' fighting styles with PSN comparing them with different classes of RPG characters . A common complaint has been the game 's loading times , which tended to be very long depending on the PlayStation Portable 's memory . Reviewers also called the game 's worlds " hollow due to the lack of interaction , and also criticized the game 's camera which sometimes made fights confusing . Visuals were also well received for being similar to the ones from PlayStation 2 's games with praise on the design of the worlds , although a lack of details was also noted . 
 Sites have also praised the game 's story , for its accessibility as a result of being a prequel , or that it did not bear elements from previous games that tended to confuse gamers such as the characters ' identities . Critics also appreciated how the story is told from three different perspectives , which helped to give different point of views as well as expand the time the game can be played . Nevertheless , some character traits were criticized such as the similarities between the protagonists to previous ones . While Eurogamer cited that the three characters had little impact to the Disney worlds ' storyline , Terra 's role was praised by 1UP.com for distancing itself from previous scenarios . Although the lack of Final Fantasy characters received mixed opinions , PSM thought that it helped to expand the exploration of Disney worlds , while Zack 's role was found suitable by GameZone . The English casting for Birth by Sleep also received positive comments with GameTrailers stating that it " features one of the few good English dubs in recent memory " , particularly Leonard Nimoy 's performance . GameSpot stated that Ventus ' and Aqua 's voice actor to have done a good job voicing them , but criticized Terra 's as one of the worst ones from the game , most notably , when compared with other well @-@ received actors . 
 IGN featured the game in their " Game of the Month " article series for September 2010 in the PSP category . The game has been listed as one of the best PlayStation Portable titles with GamesRadar placing it sixth and IGN eighteenth . In an ASCII Media Works poll , it was listed as the tenth best game of 2010 . It won in the category of " Best Portable Console Videogame " in France 's 2011 Japan Expo . In November 2011 , Sony announced Birth by Sleep would receive the " Gold Prize " for selling over 500 @,@ 000 units in Japan . 
 = = Versions and merchandise = = 
 Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep was also released with a limited edition PSP @-@ 3000 as a bundle in Japan featuring designs from the Kingdom Hearts series on its back . On March 16 , 2010 , Square Enix announced the English version of the game , which was released on September 7 , 2010 in North America , and on September 10 , 2010 in Europe . The English version of the game contains some adjustments from the original version , such as a new difficulty setting called Critical Mode , and additional songs for the Ice Cream Beat minigame . A new boss known only as the Unknown appears in the overseas versions , as well as a new gameplay element called " Crown Stickers " , which act much the same way as the Puzzle Pieces from Kingdom Hearts II Final Mix . The game also has a notable voice @-@ acting cast of returning members such as Jesse McCartney and James Woods , as well as numerous new actors such as Willa Holland , Jason Dohring , Leonard Nimoy , and Mark Hamill . An Ultimania guidebook of the game was released on March 25 , 2010 . Like previous games , a light novel of Birth by Sleep has been written by Tomoko Kanemaki and illustrated by Shiro Amano . Its first volume , " Something Strange " was published by Square Enix on December 24 , 2010 , the second - " Best Friends " - on February 24 , 2011 , and the third and final volume , " To the Future " , on May 26 , 2011 . Additionally , the tracks featured in the game have been released as part of a three @-@ disc album which includes the soundtracks from Birth by Sleep , 358 / 2 Days and coded . 
 = = = Final Mix = = = 
 In early 2010 , Nomura was asked in an interview if Square Enix would release an international Final Mix of Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep , to which he replied he would like to , as he enjoyed the work from the English voice casting done in the previous games . However , he stated that one of the main reasons for the popularity of the Final Mix version of Kingdom Hearts II was because it was released alongside the PlayStation 2 remake of Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories , so he and the staff would think on it more . In September 2010 , Square Enix announced that Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep Final Mix would be released on January 20 , 2011 in Japan . Like all Final Mix releases , it combines English audio with Japanese game text and subtitles , and includes all additional features implemented in the Western versions as well as brand new content , such as a new playable secret episode . Alongside The 3rd Birthday , Final Mix includes a code that allows players to obtain downloadable content for Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy , with Final Mix featuring the character Cloud Strife costume from the original Kingdom Hearts . Final Mix topped the video game charts following its release with 77 @,@ 317 units sold in the first week , and reaching 106 @,@ 276 in February 2011 . Final Mix was released for the first time outside Japan as part of Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix . 
 = = = HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix = = = 
 In the credits of Kingdom Hearts HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix , clips of Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep Final Mix were shown , hinting at its inclusion in another collection . On October 14 , 2013 , Square Enix announced Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix , a second compilation exclusively for the PlayStation 3 after HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix . The release includes both Kingdom Hearts II Final Mix and Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep Final Mix in HD with trophy support . Additionally , the collection includes HD cinematic scenes from Kingdom Hearts Re : coded . It was released in Japan on October 2 , 2014 , North America on December 2 , 2014 , Australia on December 4 , 2014 , and Europe on December 5 , 2014 . 
 = = = A Fragmentary Passage = = = 
 In September 2015 , Square Enix announced Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 8 Final Chapter Prologue . The collection features Kingdom Hearts 0 @.@ 2 : Birth by Sleep – A Fragmentary Passage , a new part of the story taking place after the events of the original Birth by Sleep , told from the perspective of Aqua . The collection also features an HD remaster of Kingdom Hearts 3D : Dream Drop Distance as well as Kingdom Hearts χ Back Cover , set to tell the tale of the Foretellers and revealing new parts of the series ' history in HD cinematics . It will be released worldwide in December 2016 . 
 = Council of Keewatin = 
 The Council of Keewatin was an unelected legislative body and territorial government for the now @-@ defunct District of Keewatin in Canada . The District of Keewatin was created by the passage of the Keewatin Act on October 7 , 1876 from a portion of Canada 's North West Territories . Lieutenant Governor Alexander Morris convinced the government that the new territorial government of the North West Territories would be unable to effectively administer land to the north and east of Manitoba . Shortly after the District of Keewatin was formed a large group of Icelanders arrived , infected with smallpox which quickly spread to the indigenous First Nation population . The Government of Canada allowed the Council to be formed for the purpose of containing the smallpox epidemic . The Council also administered Indian treaty claims , immigrant land claims , Hudson 's Bay Company trading post concerns as well as policing and health care . The Council lasted from November 25 , 1876 , until April 16 , 1877 , after which control of the territory was returned under federal jurisdiction . 
 The founder of the Council of Keewatin as well as the District of Keewatin was Alexander Morris . He selected and appointed the members to serve after being given permission by the Government of Canada . After the Council was disbanded in 1877 , the legislation passed and departments organized by the council , such as the Boards of Health and Quarantine , continued to remain in force as late as 1878 . The council was not reconstituted before the District of Keewatin was ceded back to the Northwest Territories in 1905 . All matters of administration were handled by the Government of Canada and the Lieutenant Governor of Manitoba . 
 = = Location = = 
 The new district of Keewatin was separate from the North West Territories . Keewatin was an area extending north of the " postage stamp " province of Manitoba and the Canada – United States border , to the northern shores of Canada . To the west was the North @-@ West Territories , to the east Ontario and again the North @-@ West Territories . The Lieutenant Governor of Manitoba , Alexander Morris , served ex officio as Lieutenant Governor of the district . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Treaty 5 land negotiations = = = 
 Morris had fully expected the Sandy Bar Saulteaux to sign Treaty 5 , The Lake Winnipeg Treaty in 1875 . The purpose of the treaty would be to free up lands for immigration and settlement were then inhabited by the First Nations people . In return the First Nations would be granted reserve land , $ 5 @.@ 00 per person annual payment , two oxen , one bull and four cows for each band , an annual payment of $ 50 @.@ 00 salary for the Chief and three executive officers amounting to $ 70 @.@ 00 total , as well as agricultural implements . The Chief also received a flag and medal . 
 = = = Icelandic land grant = = = 
 Icelanders emigrated from Iceland due to volcanic eruptions and shortage of grasslands , as well as a population increase which limited access to resources . Canada was attracting immigrants with land to settle western Canada in this era . Lord Dufferin , Governor General of Canada , and Lieutenant Governor Alexander Morris granted the Icelanders territory at Sandy Bar , south of the Icelandic River . Between 235 and 285 Icelanders arrived at <unk> near Gimli on October 21 , 1875 ; later that summer 1200 new immigrants from Iceland joined them . The Icelandic settlers elected a provisional town council of five members for the colony administration . The Dominion Government granted free transportation within Canada and settlement rights for a reserve known as New Iceland ( Nýja <unk> ) , established by an Order in Council . 27 @,@ 000 acres ( 110 km2 ) was set aside for the New Iceland territory , which comprised 57 @.@ 9 kilometres ( 36 @.@ 0 mi ) astride the western shore of Lake Winnipeg between Boundary Creek and White Mud River ( Icelandic River ) inclusive of Big Island ( Hecla Island ) . The Canadian government also promised the Icelanders local self @-@ government , laws and judicial system and maintenance of their own school system . The Icelanders received a loan , which was offered to the settlement in stages . $ 15 @,@ 000 was allotted to the first arrivals of 1875 . Then a loan of $ 5 @,@ 000 was extended to the summer immigrants to cover the cost of tickets , and $ 8 @,@ 000 for agricultural tools and provisions . An extra $ 9 @,@ 000 was paid to cover travel costs and three months provisions . $ 25 @,@ 000 was received in April which was used for seed and livestock : 250 head of cattle were purchased . October saw another loan of $ 18 @,@ 000 for winter provisions , and 100 cows . Altogether , $ 80 @,@ 000 was loaned to the Icelandic settlers , for which the 160 acres ( 65 ha ) of settlement lands per settler was used as collateral . Their local council was dissolved on April 12 , 1876 , when the District of Keewatin was established by the Dominion Government under the North @-@ West Territories Act . At this same time the territory of New Iceland underwent an official transfer to the District of Keewatin . 
 = = = Land claim dispute = = = 
 A land claim dispute arose between the Saulteaux family of John Ramsay and the Icelandic family of Ólafur Ólafsson . The Saulteaux believed the boundary line between the settlements was at the south shore of the river . Ólafur Ólafsson constructed his cabin on the river 's north shore . <unk> Provencher supported Ólafsson . Ramsay brought his claim to Morris . Ramsay had recently lost his wife and four of his five children to smallpox and wanted the Saulteaux title to be recognized . The surveyor general and the Indian Affairs Department deputy superintendent both agreed that Ramsay was entitled to the land under the Indian Act . Treaty 5 was not signed by the Sandy Bar Saulteaux until 1876 , after all appeals to federal agents regarding land claims failed . 
 = = = Smallpox = = = 
 The District of Keewatin had a severe epidemic of smallpox that started shortly after the territory 's creation in the settlements of Gimli and Sandy Bar . The disease originated from a large group of Icelandic settlers who settled on the west shore of Lake Winnipeg . The Icelanders thought the first appearance of the epidemic was chickenpox and so it was not recognized as a deadly smallpox epidemic . The epidemic quickly spread to the local native population who were the predominant inhabitants of the territory . 
 = = Council formation = = 
 The Council of Keewatin was created and its first and only members were appointed and sworn in on November 25 , 1876 , by Lieutenant Governor Alexander Morris . Morris sent word to Ottawa by telegraph on November 24 , 1876 , asking for permission to set up the Council . The federal government responded quickly , allowing appointments and a proclamation to be printed the next day . Members of the Legislative Council were entitled to use the prefix The Honourable for the duration of their appointments . The first session of the Council opened on November 30 , 1876 , with Morris delivering the only throne speech . He emphasized the impending need for the council to deal with the smallpox epidemic in the fledgling territory . He detailed the history of the Temporary North @-@ West Council , why the District of Keewatin was created , and outlined the powers of the Council of Keewatin . 
 The council sat in Fort Garry , Manitoba even though this was outside of the boundaries of the District of Keewatin . Morris determined during the creation of the territory that the affairs of the District of Keewatin should be administered from Fort Garry until November 7 , 1876 . A total of six members were appointed to the Council . The law that created the territory allowed for a minimum of five members . 
 William Hespeler was appointed to serve on the Executive Council as a cabinet minister serving Lieutenant Governor Morris . His portfolio gave him the title of Territorial Immigration Agent . This office was needed to put measures and people in place to control access by settlers in the territory to help quarantine the smallpox epidemic . 
 The other members of the council were all chosen for their medical knowledge rather than a political background . The Council met at Early Government House in Fort Garry , which was also the home of Alexander Morris . The only clerk and secretary appointed to serve the council was F.G. Becher . The Council chose William Osborne Smith to chair the proceedings of the Council as well as the Board of Health . 
 = = = Emergency quarantine = = = 
 Fearing the disease would spread to Manitoba and the North West Territories , Morris advised the Department of the Interior that a territorial government needed to be set up to deal with the crisis . Morris appointed Dr Lynch to care for the Saulteaux smallpox epidemic . <unk> Jonasson visited John Taylor to seek help , returning to New Iceland on November 8 , 1877 . Drs David Young , James S. Lynch , and A. Baldwin arrived at New Iceland and placed the area under quarantine as of November 27 , 1876 . 
 A hospital was established in Gimli , Keewatin and a quarantine station at Netley Creek . The Grassy Narrows House , a Hudson 's Bay " outpost " also became an emergency hospital during the epidemic . The nearby Sandy Bar Band first nation community at Riverton was reached by Lynch and Young , and had been abandoned . The buildings were burned to contain the smallpox epidemic . Following the trail , they found the remaining 17 residents of the Sandy Bar band of about 60 people . The Sandy Bar Band fled to the east shore of Lake Winnipeg . This spread the epidemic and infected any bands living there . Ramsay guided the doctor to the various bands . At Sandy River 200 dead bodies were found . The Hudson 's Bay Company warehouse , houses and teepees were all burned . 
 After the throne speech was read on November 30 , 1876 , the council of Keewatin got to work quickly and passed its first piece of legislation . The Act was entitled An Act respecting Small Pox , and it served as the centrepiece of the council . The Act defined penalties and provisions to enforce Morris ' proclamation outlawing intercourse by people outside the infected zone who did not have permission from the Council . The Act also offered advice and procedures for medical treatment of the disease . For the entire lifespan of the Council , all acts and regulations passed were geared towards dealing with smallpox . Everyone who wanted to do business with or visit the infected areas had to obtain permission from the council . 
 By April 1877 , the smallpox epidemic abated , however the quarantine remained until June 20 , 1877 . The Icelanders demonstrated to Netley Creek , the southern border of New Island , requesting an end to the quarantine , which had been lifted the previous day , June 19 . Of the 1200 Icelandic settlers , 102 died of smallpox . Many of the immigrants had been immunized in Iceland before they travelled to Canada . 
 = = = The fur trade = = = 
 During the short existence of the Council , it became involved with regulating the fur trade . The Council feared furs contaminated with smallpox would be exported outside the quarantine zone . The Council invited people involved in the fur trade from Keewatin , Manitoba , and even the United States government to discuss the matter . The purpose of the meeting was to solicit testimony and gain the support of the industry , so that the Council could effectively draft , implement and enforce legislation . 
 The Council passed an Act on February 26 , 1877 , which was subsequently given Royal Assent . The measures adopted effectively quarantined furs from areas of the district deemed infected , and prevented their export . However furs from areas in the District of Keewatin deemed to be free of smallpox could be exported as long as they did not come into contact with infected furs . 
 Before being exported from the district , all furs had to pass through depots manned by a quarantine officer appointed by the Board of Health . Any furs believed to have come into contact with parts of the district infected by smallpox were to be destroyed . This led to some problems for the Government of Canada after the Council was dissolved . Some people whose furs had been destroyed under these regulations applied to the Government for compensation , as no mechanism was put in place when the Act was drafted . These claims for compensation were considered , but ultimately ignored . 
 The Hudson 's Bay Company had lost a full year in the northern fur trade , and pressed for further steps to be taken to prevent another smallpox outbreak . Dr. <unk> <unk> was appointed as medical superintendent of the Manitoba and North @-@ West <unk> in October 1878 . His mission was to vaccinate all Native persons resident in the Manitoba Superintendency . Every spring vaccinations were administered to <unk> people who were not away hunting . 
 = = = Board of Health = = = 
