 The Council of Keewatin established a powerful Board of Health for the territory . The Board of Health was run out of a head office in the city of Winnipeg and a local office was also established at the town of Gimli , in the District of Keewatin . 
 The Board of Health was led by Chief Health Officer Walter R. <unk> . All matters regarding quarantine within the district were handled by Edmund A. Struthers . The board was established to confine and treat the smallpox epidemic in the territory , and had wide powers to carry out this mission . The Board of Health established vaccination programs among native populations in the District of Keewatin based on legislation that continued well after the Council was dissolved . Mr <unk> was despatched by Governor Morris in February 1877 with a quarantine party to Lake Winnipeg to establish a northern quarantine and sanitary cordon between the City of Winnipeg and the infected area . This party was to regulate the traffic in fur as well . The party arrived at Dog Head outpost in May 1877 , having travelled the winter months by foot . There were no supplies , money or instruction on arrival . The quarantine party returned to Winnipeg in July 1877 half starved . 
 = = Dissolution = = 
 The council was short @-@ lived : there was just one legislative session . Less than a year after its formation , the smallpox crisis in the District of Keewatin subsided . The Department of the Interior determined that a territorial government for the district was no longer needed . The entire council resigned and was effectively dissolved after being requested to do so on April 16 , 1877 , by Secretary of State James Aikins . Aikins had the council resign as a cost @-@ saving measure ; also he did not want members of the council to abuse the powers of their appointments . 
 Control of the District of Keewatin returned to the federal government under the management of the Department of the Interior in cooperation with the Lieutenant Governor of Manitoba . The council was not reconstituted until the remaining portions of the territory were once again merged with the Northwest Territories in 1905 . The land formally comprising the territory is today governed by the provincial and territorial governments of Ontario , Manitoba and Nunavut . 
 = = Debate of the Senate of the Dominion of Canada = = 
 On February 25 , 1878 , the Honourable Mr Girard presented to the Governor @-@ General the correspondence between the Government of Canada , the Council of Keewatin , and the Government of Manitoba regarding the smallpox claims and accounts . The Honourable Mr Pelletier replied that the accounts were examined by <unk> Mr. Norquay and Mr. Begg representing the Province of Manitoba , and Messrs. McCall and Graham representing the Dominion Government . The resolution would be that the Government of Keewatin ( Dominion Government ) would pay $ 20 @,@ 000 and the Government of Manitoba $ 5 @,@ 000 in settlement of claims . $ 20 @,@ 000 is equivalent to $ 490 thousand in present @-@ day terms and $ 5 @,@ 000 is equivalent to $ 123 thousand . 
 = = New Iceland = = 
 New Iceland elected administrators again on February 13 , 1877 . Under the provisional constitution , the colony was named <unk> ( Lake assembly ) . It was divided into four districts each with its own administration : <unk> ( Willow Point District ) , <unk> ( <unk> District ) , <unk> ( River District ) and <unk> ( Big Island District ) . When the quarantine ended in July 1877 , it was too late to seed . The Federal government voted to survey a road in the colony , with an allotment of $ 8 @,@ 000 to employ labourers . Workers were paid 60 to 70 cents a day along with their daily expenses . The women looking after camps were also similarly paid . This monetary income enabled settlers to remain at New Iceland till the following agricultural season of 1878 . New Iceland became a part of the province of Manitoba in 1881 . This regional Icelandic government continued until 1887 . 
 = = First Nation = = 
 During Treaty 5 negotiations , Norway House Band requested the <unk> Narrows area which was the White Mud River – Icelandic River area which was a portion of New Iceland . The Norway House Band ( <unk> Sipi Cree Nation ) agreed to settle at Fisher River . Norway House Band was a Western Woods Cree community of the Algonquian ( Central ) language group . The Sandy Bar group wanted also a reserve in the <unk> Narrows area . Their settlement area was on the northern edge of New Iceland . The Sandy Bar <unk> / Cree of the Algonquian ( Central ) language group may have been a portion of the <unk> @-@ St. Peters Band . This group was almost entirely decimated during the smallpox epidemic , those who were left were re @-@ located . The Island band requested a reserve on Big Island ( later renamed Hecla Island ) . This band settled at Hollow Water River and renounced the traditional lands at Big Island . Blood Vein River , Big Island , Sandy Bar , <unk> and Jack @-@ Fish Head bands met with Messrs. Reid and Howard in October 1876 and requested lands for their reserves . The Dog Head Band requested a point opposite the Dog Head River . Similarly the Blood Vein River Band made a request for lands at the mouth of the Blood Vein River . The Big Island Band at this time requested the lands at the mouth of <unk> River . The Jack @-@ Fish Head Band made requests for the north side of Jack Head Point at the <unk> River . The Sandy Bar Band , a branch of St. Peter 's Band requested White Mud River site on the west Side of Lake Winnipeg . The Blood Vein River Band was a Saulteaux ( Ojibwa ) first nation of the Algonquian ( Central ) language family . The Moose Lake ( Big Island ) band which signed Treaty 5 in 1875 was a Cree first nation of the Algonquian ( Central ) language group . The Big Island band which signed Treaty 2 in 1877 was an Ojibwa first nation of the Algonquian ( Central ) language group . 
 = Night of Champions ( 2008 ) = 
 Night of Champions ( 2008 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) and presented by P & G 's Gillette Fusion Power , which took place on June 29 , 2008 , at the American Airlines Center in Dallas , Texas . It was the first annual event to be promoted solely under the Night of Champions name and the eighth annual event under the Vengeance / Night of Champions chronology . It starred wrestlers from the Raw , SmackDown , and ECW brands . Like the previous year before , every match on the card was contested for a championship ; three were won and five were retained . 
 The main event was an interpromotional match for the WWE Championship between SmackDown representative , Triple H , and Raw representative , John Cena ; Triple H won the match and retained the championship . The main match was also an interpromotional match for the World Heavyweight Championship between SmackDown representative , Edge , and Raw representative , Batista , which Edge won to retain the championship . The main match from the ECW brand was an interpromotional standard match involving three wrestlers for the ECW Championship , in which ECW representative , Mark Henry , defeated the champion and Raw representative , Kane , and SmackDown representative , The Big Show . 
 Night of Champions received 273 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , and was instrumental in helping WWE increase its pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue by $ 21 @.@ 9 million compared to the previous year . The professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer website rated the entire event a 7 out of 10 stars , higher and lower than the 2007 event 's ratings of 5 and 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 ( there were two ratings because two different writers reviewed the show ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 The event featured eight professional wrestling matches , performances with pre @-@ determined outcomes between wrestlers with fictional personalities that are portrayed as real , were featured on the event 's card . The buildup to the matches and the scenarios that took place before , during , and after the event were planned by WWE 's creative staff . The event starred wrestlers from the Raw , SmackDown and ECW brands – storyline expansions of the promotion where employees are assigned to wrestling brands under the WWE banner . Wrestlers portrayed either a villainous or fan favorite gimmick , as they followed a series of events which generally built tension , leading to a wrestling match . 
 The main event scripted into Night of Champions on the Raw brand was between Triple H and John Cena over the WWE Championship . At the Royal Rumble , Cena won the Royal Rumble match , a multi @-@ competitor match type in which wrestlers are eliminated until one is left and declared winner , where he earned the right to challenge for the WWE Championship at WrestleMania XXIV . The next night on Raw , Cena stated that he did not want to wait until WrestleMania for a title match , and decided that he wanted to face then champion Randy Orton for the title on that same episode . Orton declined to defend the title on Raw , but proposed to Cena that they could meet at WWE 's next pay @-@ per @-@ view event , No Way Out , in a title match , to which Cena agreed . At the event , Cena defeated Orton by disqualification , but did not win the title because a title can only change hands via pinfall or submission . That same night , Triple H won an Elimination Chamber match , where the ring is surrounded by a steel structure of chain and girders , to earn a title shot at WrestleMania . The night after No Way Out , Cena demanded that he receive a title rematch , following his match with Orton , but Raw General Manager William Regal , a portrayed match maker and rules enforcer , announced that Cena and Orton would be facing each other in a non @-@ title match , with Triple H as the special guest referee , in the main event later that night , with the stipulation that if Cena won , he would join the title match at WrestleMania , making it a standard match involving three wrestlers . Cena won the match , making him part of the main event at WrestleMania . At WrestleMania , Orton defeated Triple H and Cena to retain the title , after pinning Cena . At Backlash , Orton defended the title once again against Cena and Triple H , this time in a Fatal Four @-@ Way Elimination match which also included John " Bradshaw " Layfield . Triple H won the match after eliminating Orton last to win the title . On the June 2 episode of Raw , Cena faced Jeff Hardy , with the stipulation being that if Cena or Hardy won they would earn a title shot against Triple H at Night of Champions . Cena won the match to challenge Triple H for the title at Night of Champions . Three weeks later , during the fifth annual WWE Draft , a mock sports draft lottery in which wrestlers switched programs , Triple H was drafted to the SmackDown brand . On the June 27 episode of SmackDown , it was revealed that Triple H would still defend the title against Cena . 
 The main feud on the SmackDown brand was between Edge and Batista over the World Heavyweight Championship . On the June 6 episode of SmackDown , Batista , Funaki , Nunzio , and Colin Delaney defeated Edge , Chavo Guerrero , Curt Hawkins and Zack Ryder in an eight @-@ man tag team match . A stipulation was placed in the match that if Batista 's team won the tag team match , Batista earned a World title match against Edge at Night of Champions . The following week , SmackDown General Manager Vickie Guerrero added a predicament to Batista 's title shot , stating that in order for the title match to occur at Night of Champions , Batista would have to defeat The Great Khali to finalize his title shot . Batista defeated the Great Khali and retained his title shot . On the June 23 episode of Raw , Batista was drafted to the Raw brand as a part of the 2008 WWE Draft . That same night , WWE Chairman Vince McMahon informed Edge that even though Batista was drafted , Edge would still defend the title no matter what the outcome was . 
 The other predominant title match on the ECW brand was between ECW Champion Kane defending the title against The Big Show and Mark Henry in a standard match involving three wrestlers . At One Night Stand , WWE 's previous pay @-@ per @-@ view event , The Big Show won a five @-@ man Singapore Cane match including CM Punk , Chavo Guerrero , Tommy Dreamer , and John Morrison to earn a title shot against Kane at Night of Champions . On the June 23 episode of Raw , Kane was drafted to the Raw brand , making the ECW title exclusive to the Raw program . During the supplemental draft , Mark Henry was drafted to the ECW brand . It was announced on WWE 's official website that Henry would be added to the title match , making it a Triple Threat match . 
 Each of the three top title feuds were affected by the 2008 WWE Draft and an additional Supplemental Draft held two days later on WWE 's official website . As a result , each of the world title matches became interpromotional matches between the Raw , SmackDown , and ECW brands with the winner of each match determining the championships for each brand . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event went live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , Jeff Hardy defeated Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) in a dark match after performing a Swanton bomb . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first televised match was a tag team match for the WWE Tag Team Championship , in which the champions , John Morrison and The Miz defended the title against Finlay and Hornswoggle . The match began with Finlay in the ring as he crotched Morrison on the ring apron . Back in the ring , Morrison performed a dropkick on Finlay . Throughout the match , the Miz and Morrison were in control . Hornswoggle was tagged in the match , which led to him to hit a hurricanrana , stunner and run up from behind the Miz , grabbed his head with one hand and leaped forward to drive Miz 's face into the mat . Back and forth action took place between both teams . The match concluded with Finlay performing the Celtic Cross on Morrison , but the Miz knocked Finlay out of the ring , before he could pin Morrison . Morrison then gained consciousness . He then pushed Hornswoggle off the top ropes and slammed him into the ring mat to gain the win and retain the tag title . 
 The next match was for the WWE United States Championship , in which Matt Hardy defended the title against Chavo Guerrero accompanied with Bam Neely . Guerrero dominated most of the match and worked on Hardy 's left knee . Neely , who was at ringside , did as well , as he grabbed Hardy 's leg around the ring post at ringside , while Guerrero distracted the referee . Guerrero tried to perform a Frog splash from the top turnbuckle , but backfired when Hardy moved out of the way . The match ended as Hardy avoided a vertical suplex , dubbed as the Three Amigos . Hardy grabbed Guerrero 's head in a forward position and forcefully pulling it down over his shoulders , which he followed with a cover and a pinfall , thus retaining the WWE United States Championship . 
 The third match was a Triple Threat match for the ECW Championship , in which Kane defended the title against The Big Show and Mark Henry . The match began with The Big Show and Kane double teaming Henry and focusing on one another . The Big Show tossed Kane over the top rope . That incident saw Trainers and Emergency medical technicians ( EMTs ) attend to Kane at ringside . In the ring , the Big Show was able to get the upper hand over Henry . Kane returned to the match , which saw him perform a flying clothesline on Henry and hit an uppercut on the Big Show . That proceeded with Kane going back and forth splashing Henry and Big Show in the corner before being caught in a bear hug hold by Henry . Kane managed to get out of the hold , which led to both Kane and the Big Show to grab and lift Henry by the throat and slam him down into the mat . Afterwards , Kane performed a superplex on the Big Show off the top rope , but Henry performed a splash . Henry covered Kane for the pinfall victory and thus becoming the new ECW champion . 
 The match that followed was for the World Tag Team Championship , in which champions Hardcore Holly and Cody Rhodes defended the title against Ted DiBiase and a mystery partner . Before the match got underway , DiBiase grabbed the microphone and said his partner had text messaged him saying that he was running late . DiBiase said he would take Holly and Rhodes in a two @-@ on @-@ one match . The bell rang and the match began with Rhodes and DiBiase in the ring . DiBiase , however , said that he wanted to face Holly in the match . Holly came into the match , but was immediately attacked by Rhodes . This incident saw Rhodes betray Holly and becoming a villain in the process . DiBiase took the microphone and introduced Rhodes as his tag team partner . The match came to an end when DiBiase placed Holly in a cobra clutch hold , a move DiBiase calls the Million Dollar Dream , slamming his head to the mat . DiBiase covered Holly to get the win and thus become World Tag Team champion with Rhodes . 
 The next match was for the WWE Intercontinental Championship , in which Chris Jericho defended the title against Kofi Kingston . In the beginning of the match , Kingston gained the upper hand over Jericho , as he performed a body @-@ block . Kingston followed this by leaping onto Jericho on the top ring corner . Though , Jericho shoved him to the ring floor . Back in the ring , Jericho followed his assaults by applying an abdominal stretch submission hold , but Kingston escaped the hold . Back and forth action took place between both competitors . Jericho got Kingston in the Walls of Jericho , a submission hold that typically starts with the opponent laying supine on the mat , with the wrestler standing and facing them . As Jericho had the hold locked on , Shawn Michaels ran through the crowd and performed Sweet Chin Music on Lance Cade , who was at ringside . As Jericho witnessed the events , he released the submission hold and tackled Michaels off the ring apron . Kingston took the advantage as he performed a jump kick , a move Kingston calls Trouble in Paradise , pinned Jericho to become the new Intercontinental Champion . 
 The sixth match was a singles match , in which WWE Women 's Champion Mickie James defended the title against Katie Lea Burchill accompanied with Paul Burchill . The beginning of the match saw back and forth action between both females . Lea controlled the match , after she threw James shoulder @-@ first into the middle turnbuckle and worked on James ' shoulder . Throughout the match , James began to take the advantage over Lea , but was not in successful in doing so . The match concluded when James performed the Mickie DT on Lea , thus winning the match and retaining her title . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The main match was a singles match , in which World Heavyweight Champion Edge defended the title against Batista . For the duration of the match , Batista , who stood at 6 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 98 m ) and weighed 290 pounds ( 130 kg ) , used his body size to his advantage as he squashed , or easily and quickly performed moves on , Edge . Batista grabbed Edge and performed a sidewalk slam , after he threw Edge to the ring corner . The match saw back and forth action between both Edge and Batista . Edge tried to perform a shoulder block takedown on Batista , but Batista charged towards Edge and hit him in the head . Mid @-@ way through the match , Edge 's associates , Curt Hawkins and Zack Ryder , wheeled General Manager Vickie Guerrero to ringside to witness the match . Edge went for another shoulder takedown , but Batista managed to move out of the way , which saw Edge crash towards the ringpost and Batista performed a sitout powerbomb , a move Batista calls the Batista Bomb . Batista covered Edge , as the referee went for the three count , he was removed from the ring by Vickie . The referee began the 10 count on Edge , who left the ring , but Edge hit the official . Vickie proceeded to call in a new referee to the match ; Chavo Guerrero came out as the new referee . Following the events , Batista lifted Vickie to the ring and threw her directly onto Hawkins , Ryder , and Guerrero , who were at ringside . Edge took advantage of the situation as he hit Batista in the face with the World title belt . Guerrero entered the ring and gave Edge the victory in the match . 
 The main event was the WWE Championship match , in which Triple H defended the title against John Cena . During the beginning of the match , Triple H and Cena began to outperform one another . Triple H , however , gained the advantage , as he lifted his knee and hit Cena in the face , followed by a facebuster knee smash . Cena took control after he jumped from the top turnbuckle and dropped his leg across the back of Triple H 's head . Cena proceeded by trying to perform a fist drop with theatrics , but Triple H countered as he was able to perform a spinebuster . Triple H regained control in the match , until Cena picked Triple H up and threw him over the top rope , where Triple H landed awkwardly on his left knee . Cena went to the outside and began to work on Triple H 's knee , putting it into the ring post twice . Back in the ring , Cena took the upper hand as he hit a chop block , a shoulder block that targets the back of an opponent 's knee , on Triple H 's knee . Another moment in the match saw Cena apply the STFU on Triple H , a move in which the wrestler wraps his arm around the neck of the opponent in a sleeper hold instead of pulling back on the head of the opponent , but Triple H escaped the submission hold . Cena tried to lift Triple H onto his shoulder , but Triple H countered as he tucked Cena 's head between his knees and jumped up to slam his head to the mat , a move that Triple H calls the Pedigree . Triple H was not able to cover Cena , as he clutched on to his left knee . Both men were down . Triple H and Cena stood to their feet , leading to Cena to lift Triple H over his shoulders and throwing him down to execute the FU , only to receive a near @-@ fall . The match concluded with Triple H hitting Cena in the midsection , allowing him to execute the Pedigree on Cena . Triple H got the pinfall victory and thus retained his title . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following Night of Champions , the Raw brand did not have a top @-@ tier championship belt , as Triple H was drafted to the SmackDown brand and took the WWE title to the program . On the June 30 episode of Raw , Edge made an appearance , causing Batista to show up and beat him down . Shortly afterwards , Edge lost the World Heavyweight title to CM Punk , after Punk cashed in his Money in the Bank contract , making the World title exclusive to the Raw brand , once more . Punk would lose the title at Unforgiven , after he was unable to compete in the title match at the event , following an attack backstage by Randy Orton . The match was won by Chris Jericho , who was named as his replacement . The ECW Championship was made exclusive to the ECW brand , following Mark Henry 's win at the event . Henry , however , lost the title to Matt Hardy at Unforgiven in September . Triple H dropped the WWE title at Survivor Series . 
 At The Great American Bash , WWE 's following pay @-@ per @-@ view event , John Morrison and The Miz lost the WWE Tag Team titles to Curt Hawkins and Zack Ryder in a Fatal Four @-@ Way match , which also involved the teams of Jesse and Festus and Finlay and Hornswoggle . At the same event , Shelton Benjamin defeated Matt Hardy for the United States Championship and Michelle McCool became the first ever WWE Divas Champion defeating Natalya in the process . At SummerSlam , Mickie James and Kofi Kingston lost their respective titles in an Intergender tag team match to Beth Phoenix and Santino Marella . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The American Airlines Center usually can accommodate 20 @,@ 000 , but the capacity was reduced for the event . This event received 273 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys . Night of Champions helped WWE earn $ 39 @.@ 8 million in revenue from pay @-@ per @-@ view events versus $ 17 @.@ 9 million the previous year , which was later confirmed by Linda McMahon , the CEO of WWE , on August 5 , 2008 in a quarterly result . Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section rated the event seven out of 10 . The rating was higher and lower than the 2007 Vengeance : Night of Champions event with the rating of 5 and 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 ( there were two ratings because two different writers reviewed the show ) . The WWE title match between Triple H and John Cena was rated an 8 out of 10 . Additionally , the ECW title match between Kane , Mark Henry , and The Big Show was rated a 3 out of 10 . 
 The event was released on DVD on July 29 , 2008 . The DVD was distributed by the label Sony Music Entertainment . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Dreamlover ( song ) = 
 " Dreamlover " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey , first released on July 27 , 1993 by Columbia Records , as the lead single from Carey 's third studio album Music Box . It was written by Carey and Dave Hall , and was produced by the pair and Walter Afanasieff . The song incorporates a sample of the hook from " Blind Alley " by The Emotions into its melody and instrumentation . " Dreamlover " helped Carey 's transition into the pop music market , a choice made following the mixed reception to her previous studio effort Emotions ( 1991 ) , which featured gospel and 1960s soul influences . Lyrically , the song pictures a protagonist calling for a perfect lover , her " <unk> , " that will whisk her away into the night and not disillusion her like her exes did in the past . 
 " Dreamlover " received generally positive reviews from contemporary music critics , many of whom praised the song 's incorporated sample , as well as Carey 's carefree vocal style . The song was the first of several of her lead singles that sampled older tunes as a musical bed , as seen in " Fantasy " ( 1995 ) , " Honey " ( 1997 ) , " Heartbreaker " ( 1999 ) , and " Loverboy " ( 2001 ) . It experienced strong worldwide success , becoming Carey 's seventh chart topper on the Billboard Hot 100 , remaining there for eight weeks . It peaked at number one in Canada and became a top @-@ ten single in Australia , the Netherlands , New Zealand , and the United Kingdom . 
 Carey performed " Dreamlover " live on several televised talk shows around the world , including The Arsenio Hall Show in September 1993 , the British music chart program Top of the Pops , and the 1993 Music Fair in Japan . In 1999 , following the release of Carey 's Rainbow , the song was included in the Mariah Carey Homecoming Special , and her appearance on The Today Show . Additionally , " Dreamlover " was featured in the set @-@ lists of most of her succeeding tours , making its debut on the Music Box Tour ( 1993 ) . The song was included on Carey 's compilation albums , Number 1 's ( 1998 ) , Greatest Hits ( 2001 ) , and # 1 to Infinity ( 2015 ) . 
 The song 's music video was filmed by Diane Martel in Copake , NY in upstate New York during August 1993 . It features a cameo appearance by Carey 's dog Jack , and shows her frolicking through a <unk> and field , swimming in a large pond , boarding a hot air balloon , and dancing alongside several shirtless male dancers . According to author Chris Nickson , the video 's carefree setting harmonized well with the song 's soft instrumentation . Due to the song 's strong radio airplay and extended charting , the video received frequent play on several music video channels throughout the summer of 1993 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Carey 's debut studio album made a strong impact on pop music , but the singer became interested in altering her sound and branching out into other genres for her second studio effort , Emotions ( 1991 ) . Columbia allowed her to take more control over her musical direction , enabling her to change the musical genre , melodies , and production style . Carey worked with many new musicians and producers on the album ; Walter Afanasieff being the only holdover from her debut . Emotions contained influences from 1950s , 60s , and 70s balladry , gospel , R & B and soul music . The album , while praised by some as being more mature and raw , failed to reach the critical or commercial heights of her debut effort ; selling fewer units and failing to introduce Carey into new markets . Columbia decided to return Carey to the same genre as her debut album and have her produce a more commercial and radio @-@ friendly record . Their plans were to tone down Carey 's vocals and soften the album 's production to create a contemporary pop record . Carey and Afanasieff agreed to the change and began writing and recording material for her third studio effort , Music Box ( 1993 ) . 
 = = Recording = = 
 While recording Music Box , Carey began to alter her songwriting style and genre choices , most notably in " Dreamlover " . The song is different from anything she had recorded on her previous album , as it leans on pop and light R & B influences . While searching for new record producers for the album , Carey came across Dave Hall , a New York native who was known from his work on Mary J. Blige 's debut album , What 's the 411 ? ( 1992 ) . Carey wanted to incorporate a sampled loop from an older song into " Dreamlover " , her second song to do so . The pair reviewed several older tunes and melodies , and chose " Blind Alley " , performed by The Emotions in 1972 . In an interview with Fred Bronson , Carey described working with Hall : 
 " I wanted to do something that had a happy feeling , something that was more open and released , and that 's really not Dave . It 's very anti what he 's about . So he said , ' Oh , you want to do that happy stuff ? All right , all right . ' He was not into doing it . Then we started listening to a lot of different and old loops and we used the ' Blind Alley ' loop and I started singing the melody over it . " 
 Although Carey had heard the hook used in several other songs over the years , she felt her use of the sample was done in a more innovative way . " We built the song from there and I wrote the lyrics and the melody and Dave ended up liking it , " she continued . After having completed the song , Hall complimented Carey 's work ethic and form of writing , calling her a " perfectionist " and " very professional . " He explained that they incorporated the hook , a melody , and the sample into the song over the course of one night . The song 's title was not added until the end of production . Hall said Carey works in a unique fashion , usually developing the song 's instrumentals and hook prior to the lyrics and title . Carey describes the songwriting process : 
 " The way I usually work is I do an untitled song . We 'll grab the hook , whether sampled or created , and use it as the working title . I wrote the verses first , as well as the melody and the inclusion of several instrumentals . Sometimes I 'll have an idea for a lyrics . If I 'm collaborating with someone , I 'll direct them in the direction that I 'm going chord wise , because I get all these melody ideas and then I lose them if I don 't have someone really good with the keyboard with me . That 's why I tend to collaborate because I lose the ideas by the time I figure out the chord . All these melody ideas just go . " 
 When Carey 's fiancé at the time , Tommy Mottola , came to hear the song in the studio , he had mixed feelings . He approached Walter Afanasieff and asked him to add some additional instrumentation and flavor . Afanasieff changed the song at the production level , altering the way in which the hook sample was incorporated into the song , as well as adding several new instruments . He described the changes to Bronson in an interview : 
 " Mariah and Dave did this loop thing which was new to us pop producers at the time . Their version of ' Dreamlover ' was missing a lot of stuff . The spirit of the song was up but it wasn 't hitting hard enough . I re @-@ worked the drums , organ and keyboard . The organ and hi @-@ hat part I changed made it a bit more swinging and a little bit more driving . I put a whole new shade of colors to it . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " Dreamlover " is a mid @-@ tempo pop and light R & B track . According to the music sheet published at Musicnotes.com , the song is written in the key of F major , and the beat is set in common time which moves at a moderate pace of 104 beats per minute . It has the sequence of F7 – Gm7 – F7 – Gm7 as its chord progression . The song was written and produced by Carey and Hall , with additional work done by Afanasieff , who added a slightly altered instrumentation . " Dreamlover " samples the hook and a musical loop from " Blind Alley " by R & B group The Emotions . The sampling provides a " backbone " for the instrumentation and production , as well as being <unk> in the bridge . Carey uses a whistle register to introduce the first verse . 
 In his review , Jozen Cummings from PopMatters described the song as " pure , frothy pop . " Cummings felt Afanasieff 's usage of the Hammond B3 organ added " an old school vibe " to " Dreamlover " , as it harmonizes with the " extremely catchy musical hook . " Cummings describes the theme of the lyrics : 
 " ... the lyric is a description of , and a call for , the mythic Dreamlover ; someone to take her away , to ' rescue ' her . Fluffy @-@ seeming stuff , to be sure ( and possibly cringe @-@ inducing for some folk ) , but very possibly also an expression of the simplest of romantic dreams : to find the ' right ' person ; someone who makes you feel taken care of , loved , safe . " 
 Cummings called the second verse 's first lines " Don 't want another pretender / To disillusion me one more time / Whispering words of forever / Playing with my mind " an " interesting mix of innocence and very grown @-@ up cynicism and world @-@ weariness . " Wayne Robins from Newsday compared the vocals to " Motown and Philly soul singing , " while praising Afansieff 's inclusion of the Hammond B @-@ 3 for the way the " riffs provide a nice organic contrast to the synthesizers that dominate the record . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Dreamlover " earned widely positive reviews from music critics , many of whom praised its production , the sampling of the hook , and the vocals . In reference to the common criticism that Carey over @-@ sings and over @-@ uses her upper registers , Cummings wrote " truth is , she is never crass in the use of her amazing instrument . On ' Dreamlover ' , especially , she keeps a close , tasteful rein on the acrobatics . " While reviewing Butterfly ( 1997 ) , Rich Juzwiak of Slant Magazine praised the song 's incorporation of the " Blind Alley " hook , saying it was done " as sweetly as possible . " Ron Wynn from Allmusic called the song personal and intense . He enjoyed Carey 's more mature vocal style on the album , as well as the usage of the hook and the instrumentation . David Browne from Entertainment Weekly felt Carey 's soft singing and lack of volume was hurtful to the song , saying she " lost herself . " He thought the hook was catchy , but overly familiar . Tom Moon from The Philadelphia Inquirer called the song " irresistibly bubbly " while J. D. Considine from The Baltimore Sun called its melody " breezy . " Roger Friedman from Fox News named " Dreamlover " and " Vision of Love " Carey 's best , calling them " the original hits . " Entertainment Weekly listed the song as one of " The 100 Greatest Moments in Rock Music : The 90s " ; it was their top pick for 1993 . " Dreamlover " received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Dreamlover " was Carey 's seventh number one single on the Billboard Hot 100 , topping the chart in its sixth week and stayed there for eight consecutive weeks ( September 5 to October 30 , 1993 ) — her longest stay at the time . It replaced " Can 't Help Falling in Love " by UB40 , and was later replaced by Meat Loaf 's " I 'd Do Anything for Love ( But I Won 't Do That ) . " It spent 26 weeks in the top 40 and was ranked number eight on the Hot 100 1993 Year @-@ End Charts and 20 on the Decade @-@ End Charts . The song was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on September 22 , 1993 , denoting shipments of over one million units throughout the United States . It sold 935 @,@ 000 units domestically . " Dreamlover " holds the joint title of the highest debuting song on the Billboard Pop Songs chart , entering the chart at number 12 on the week dated August 14 , 1993 but was tied by Taylor Swift 's " Shake It Off " in 2014 . In Canada , " Dreamlover " became Carey 's fifth number one single on the Canadian RPM Singles Chart , debuting at number 60 on the chart during the week of August 14 , 1993 . Three weeks later , the song reached the chart 's number one position ; it spent six consecutive weeks at the top and a total of 21 weeks on the singles chart . On the RPM Year @-@ End Charts , " Dreamlover " finished at number two . 
 " Dreamlover " entered the Australian Singles Chart at number 41 during the week of August 23 , 1993 , eventually reaching a peak of number seven and spending a total of 21 consecutive weeks on the chart . The song was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of over 35 @,@ 000 units throughout the country . In New Zealand , " Dreamlover " reached a peak position of number two on the New Zealand Singles Chart and spent sixteen weeks fluctuating on the chart . The Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) certified the song gold for shipments of 7 @,@ 500 units in the country . On the Dutch Top 40 , " Dreamlover " debuted at number 36 during the week of August 28 , 1993 . After attaining a peak of number nine , the song dropped off the top 40 after a chart run of 13 weeks . On the yearly charts , the song finished at number 69 . In Switzerland the song peaked at number thirteen and spent sixteen weeks on the singles chart . On the UK Singles Chart , " Dreamlover " reached its peak position of number nine during the week of September 4 , 1993 . It spent a total of ten weeks on the chart , exiting on October 23 , 1993 . Sales in the United Kingdom are estimated at 150 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Music video and remixes = = 
 The music video for " Dreamlover " was directed by Diane Martel and filmed in upstate New York in June 1993 . The video features scenes of Carey swimming in a small pond by a waterfall , boarding a colorful hot air balloon , and dancing alongside several shirtless male dancers . As the video begins , Carey is swimming underwater while wearing clothing . She is soon gasping for air and climbing into a flower bed above . As she frolics and rolls in a field , scenes of Carey boarding a hot air balloon are inter @-@ cut . Her dog Jack makes a cameo appearance , as he follows her through the field and pond . After a short interval of dancing alongside several male dancers , Carey leaves with her dog as the video concludes . After filming the video , Carey revealed that the water was so cold that she refused to swim until the director , Martel , dived in first . Author Chris Nickson felt the video captured the song 's soft and relaxed nature : " The casual feel , almost like clips from home movies edited together , captured the song 's off @-@ the @-@ shoulder <unk> . " The video received heavy rotation on several video music channels , which added to the song 's chart performance . 
 " Dreamlover " marked the first time Carey was given creative control over remixing her songs . She enlisted David Morales to create the Def Club Mix ; it was the first of Carey 's remixes to use re @-@ recorded vocals . An officially @-@ released live version of " Dreamlover " , derived from the television special Here Is Mariah Carey ( 1994 ) , is available . " Dreamlover " B @-@ side track ( " Do You Think of Me " ) was written and produced by Carey , Afanasieff , Cory Rooney , and Mark Morales . Kelefah Sanneh from The New York Times complimented the remix , writing " [ It ] is a revelation : after a long percussion break , he isolates a few of Ms. Carey 's ad @-@ libs ; her <unk> vocals sound spookier than all of Basement Jaxx 's sound effects combined . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Carey performed " Dreamlover " on several televised broadcasts in the US and throughout Europe . The song was sung live on The Arsenio Hall Show with " Hero " as a two @-@ piece set @-@ list . Carey performed " Dreamlover " on the British music program Top of the Pops , the Dutch program <unk> , and the Japanese show Music Fair . In a promotional effort for her seventh studio album Rainbow , Carey filmed a FOX special titled The Mariah Carey Homecoming Special , a mini @-@ concert filmed at her old high school in Huntington , New York . It aired on December 21 , 1999 . " Dreamlover " served as one of the opening numbers . The song was performed in 2003 on The Today Show as part of a four @-@ song set as a promotion for Carey 's 2002 album , Charmbracelet . 
 Following the televised appearances , Carey performed the song live on several of her tours . In the Daydream World Tour she performed it in front of a backdrop showing footage from the song 's video . On her Music Box Tour and Butterfly World Tour , the song served as the fifth song of the set @-@ list . Carey performed alongside several female back @-@ up dancers who mimicked her light dance routines . Carey used a similar presentation on the Rainbow World Tour . On Carey 's Charmbracelet and The Adventures of Mimi Tours , three male backup dancers were featured on stage , with the three female background vocalists behind them . On the latter tour , Carey 's wore a black bikini , with a matching cape and Christian Louboutin pumps . She mixed the song with an instrumental remix of Mtume 's song " Juicy Fruit . " Following the release of her twelfth studio album , Memoirs of an Imperfect Angel ( 2009 ) , Carey embarked on the Angels Advocate Tour . It was her first tour that did not regularly feature the song , as it was only performed on a few select dates . In addition , Carey sang the song as a part of her Las Vegas residency , Mariah Carey Number 1 's , which chronicles the singer 's 18 US Hot 100 Number 1 hits . For the performance , she donned a sequined white dress , and entered the stage in a pink convertible car . At the end of the performance , she stands atop a stage fan , while her skirt blows in the wind , as an homage to Marilyn Monroe . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 These credits were adapted from the Music Box liner notes . 
 " Dreamlover " was recorded at Right Track Studios , New York , and mixed at Sony Music Studios , New York . 
 Mariah Carey – co @-@ producing , songwriting , vocals 
 Dave Hall – co @-@ producing , songwriting , synthesizer 
 Walter Afanasieff – co @-@ producing , songwriting , organ 
 Bob Ross – engineering 
 Ren Klyce – programming 
 Mick Guzauski – mixing 
 Bob Ludwig – mastering 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Red @-@ necked grebe = 
 The red @-@ necked grebe ( Podiceps grisegena ) is a migratory aquatic bird found in the temperate regions of the northern hemisphere . Its wintering habitat is largely restricted to calm waters just beyond the waves around ocean coasts , although some birds may winter on large lakes . <unk> prefer shallow bodies of fresh water such as lakes , marshes or fish @-@ ponds as breeding sites . 
 The red @-@ necked grebe is a nondescript dusky @-@ grey bird in winter . During the breeding season , it acquires the distinctive red neck plumage , black cap and contrasting pale grey face from which its name was derived . It also has an elaborate courtship display and a variety of loud mating calls . Once paired , it builds a nest from water plants on top of floating vegetation in a shallow lake or bog . 
 Like all grebes , the Red @-@ necked is a good swimmer , a particularly swift diver , and responds to danger by diving rather than flying . The feet are positioned far back on the body , near the tail , which makes the bird ungainly on land . It dives for fish or picks insects off vegetation ; it also swallows its own feathers , possibly to protect the digestive system . The conservation status of its two subspecies — P. g. grisegena found in Europe and western Asia , and the larger P. g. holboelii ( formerly <unk> grebe ) , in North America and eastern Siberia — is evaluated as Least Concern , and the global population is stable or growing . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 <unk> are small to medium @-@ large water birds with lobed , rather than webbed , toes . There are several genera , of which the most widespread is Podiceps with nine species , one recently extinct . The red @-@ necked grebe 's closest relative is the fish @-@ eating great crested grebe of Europe and western Asia . It is possible that the red @-@ necked grebe originally evolved in North America and later spread to Europe , where a change of diet to include more insects helped to reduce competition with its larger cousin . Fossils of the species dating to the middle Pleistocene have been found in Italy . 
 The genus name Podiceps comes from Latin <unk> , " vent " or " anus " , and pes , " foot " , and is a reference to the placement of a grebe 's legs towards the rear of its body . The species name grisegena is from Latin griseus ( grey ) and <unk> ( cheek ) and refers to the face pattern of the breeding adult . 
 The red @-@ necked grebe has two subspecies , the nominate subspecies P. g. grisegena in Europe and western Asia , and P. g. holboelii ( <unk> 's grebe , named for Danish explorer of Greenlandic birds Carl Peter <unk> ) in North America and eastern Siberia . The east Asian birds have slightly smaller bills than the American form , although the differences are too small to merit separation as a third subspecies . 
 = = Description = = 
 The red @-@ necked grebe is a medium @-@ large grebe , smaller than the great crested grebe of Eurasia , and the western and Clark 's grebes of North America . The adult of the nominate European subspecies is 40 – 50 cm ( 16 – 20 in ) long with a 77 – 85 cm ( 30 – 33 in ) average wingspan , and weighs 692 – 925 g ( 24 @.@ 4 – 32 @.@ 6 oz ) . In breeding plumage , it has a black cap that extends below the eye , very pale grey cheeks and throat , a rusty red neck , dark grey back and flanks , and white underparts . The eyes are dark brown and the long , pointed bill is black with a yellow base . 
 The winter plumage of the red @-@ necked grebe is duskier than that of other grebes ; its dark grey cap is less defined , and merges into the grey face , and a pale crescent that curves around the rear of the face contrasts with the rest of the head . The front of the neck is whitish or light grey , the hind neck is darker grey , and the yellow of the bill is less obvious than in summer . Although the red @-@ necked grebe is unmistakable in breeding plumage , it is less distinctive in winter and can be confused with similar species . It is larger than the Slavonian ( horned ) grebe , with a relatively larger bill and a grey , rather than white face . It is closer in size to the Eurasian great crested grebe , but that species is longer @-@ necked , has a more contrasting head pattern , and always shows white above the eye . 
 The sexes are similar in appearance , although the male averages heavier than the female . Chicks have a striped head and breast , and older juveniles have a striped face , diffuse blackish cap , pale red neck and extensive yellow on the bill . 
 The subspecies P. g. holboelii is larger than the nominate race at 43 – 56 cm ( 17 – 22 in ) length , with a 61 – 88 cm ( 24 – 35 in ) wingspan , and a weight of 750 – 1 @,@ 600 g ( 26 – 56 oz ) . The plumages are the same as those of the nominate race , although the adult 's bill is more extensively yellow . The difference in size between the sexes is greater than for this subspecies that for P. g. grisegena . 
 The red @-@ necked grebe flies with its long neck extended and its large feet trailing behind the body , which gives it a stretched @-@ out appearance . The relatively small wings are grey with white secondaries , and beat very rapidly . Its small wing area means that the grebe is unable to take off from land , and needs a lengthy run across water to gain the speed needed for take @-@ off . Like all grebes , the red @-@ necked is an expert swimmer ; it uses its feet for propulsion underwater , and steers by rotating its legs , since its tail is too short for this purpose . 
 This is one of the most vocal grebes during the breeding season , but , like its relatives , it is mainly silent for the rest of the year . It has a loud , wailing or howling display call <unk> , given by a single bird or a pair in duet , by night or during the day , and often from cover . Long sequences of up to 60 consecutive notes may be delivered during singing encounters between rival territorial birds . A great variety of quacking , clucking , hissing , rattling and purring calls are also given , with much individual variation . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Breeding takes place in shallow freshwater lakes , bays of larger lakes , marshes , and other inland bodies of water , often less than 3 ha ( 7 @.@ 4 acres ) in extent and less than 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) deep . The red @-@ necked grebe shows a preference for waters in forested areas or , further north , in shrub tundra , and favours sites with abundant emergent vegetation , such as reedbeds . The best breeding habitat is fish @-@ ponds , which have an abundance of food in addition to meeting the other requirements . The American subspecies is less tied to a high aquatic plant density , and sometimes breeds on quite open lakes . 
 All populations are migratory and winter mainly at sea , usually in estuaries and bays , but often well offshore where fish are within diving reach near shallow banks or islands . The preferred passage and wintering habitat is water less than 15 m ( 49 ft ) deep with a sand or gravel bottom , scattered rocks and patches of seaweed . During winter , birds typically feed alone and rarely aggregate into flocks , but on migration , concentrations of over 2000 individuals may occur at favoured staging sites . Migration is usually at night , but may occur during the day , especially when over water . This is particularly noticeable in autumn on the Great Lakes , when up to 18 @,@ 000 birds may pass Whitefish Point on Lake Superior ; these are thought to be Canadian breeders heading for the Atlantic Ocean to winter . This easterly route is longer than that to the Pacific , but avoids the Rockies . 
 The breeding range of the red @-@ necked grebe overlaps with that of the Slavonian grebe , although the latter species tends to be displaced from sites suited to both . The red @-@ necked grebe prefers an inland temperate climate , and is less successful near coasts and in subarctic and warm temperate zones . It is usually a lowland bird , breeding below 100 m ( 330 ft ) , although has nested at up to 1 @,@ 800 m ( 5 @,@ 900 ft ) in Turkey . 
 The nominate subspecies breeds from southern Sweden and Denmark through central and eastern Europe east to western Siberia , and winters mainly in the North and Baltic Seas , with smaller numbers in the Adriatic , Black Sea , Caspian Sea , Mediterranean and on inland lakes . P. g. holboelii breeds in North America in Alaska , western and central Canada , and the northern US east to Minnesota ; in Asia it nests in eastern Siberia from Kamchatka south to Hokkaido and west to Mongolia . The Asian birds winter at sea from Japan to the East China Sea , and American breeders winter in the Pacific , mainly from southern Alaska to British Columbia ( with smaller numbers south to California ) , and in the Atlantic from Newfoundland and Labrador to Florida . Some birds remain on the Great Lakes if they are sufficiently ice @-@ free . This species occurs as a rare winter vagrant in Afghanistan , Pakistan and parts of northern and western India . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Breeding and survival = = = 
 Red @-@ necked grebes usually nest as isolated pairs with more than 50 m ( 160 ft ) between neighbouring nests , although semi @-@ colonial nesting may occur in suitable sites , where up to 20 pairs each defend a linear territory . Semi @-@ colonial breeding is more likely to occur in prime locations , such as large floating mats of vegetation with no connection to the shoreline . Such sites , safe from most predators and large enough to provide some wind and wave protection , have grebes nesting much closer than shoreline breeders , down to 10 m ( 33 ft ) . Pairs nesting in these colonies produce larger clutches of eggs , which hatch earlier in the season and result in larger broods . The territory is defended with various threat displays , including wing @-@ spreading , hunching , and bill @-@ thrusting ; pairs breeding in colonies are more aggressive , less likely to leave the nest unguarded and show a greater tendency to move out of sight of the colony when not incubating . Breeding is often in loose association with gulls or other colonial water birds . 
 The monogamous pair forms in April or May on migration or at the breeding water , and a highly vocal courtship ritual commences . The elaborate breeding performance includes head @-@ shaking , a head @-@ lowered " cat " display , parallel rushes in an upright position and mutual presentations of green weeds , and culminates in a " penguin " dance in which pair members raise the whole body upright , breast to breast . 
 Like all grebes , the red @-@ necked grebe nests near water into which it can escape , since the position of the legs far back on the body prevents fast movement on land . It often breeds further within reed beds than other grebes . The nest is a floating platform of plant matter anchored to submerged or emergent vegetation , in water 0 @.@ 5 – 0 @.@ 75 m ( 20 – 30 in ) deep , and with the bulk of nest below the water line . Egg @-@ laying mainly takes place from mid @-@ April to May in Europe , and somewhat later , from mid @-@ May to June , in North America . Parents may leave the nest for significant periods of time during the night , possibly to evade nocturnal predators . It is unclear whether this is for self @-@ protection or to protect the eggs by diverting attention from the nest ; the clutch does not appear to suffer from this temporary abandonment , whatever the reason . 
 The red @-@ necked grebe lays four or five ( range one to nine ) dull white or pale blue eggs , which average 3 @.@ 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) in breadth , 5 @.@ 1 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) in length , and weigh about 30 @.@ 5 g ( 1 @.@ 08 oz ) , of which 10 % is shell . Parents take turns to incubate the eggs for 21 – 33 days until the precocial downy chicks hatch ; they immediately climb onto the parent 's back , where they spend most of their time until they are 10 – 17 days old . The young may be fed by the parents for up to 54 days after fledging , and can fly at 50 – 70 days . The parents do not interfere with the feeding of their chicks when they are still being carried . Later they care for the younger chicks for longer , and are aggressive with the older offspring . This <unk> the post @-@ fledging survival of all chicks , and encourages their independence . The brood may be split , so that each parent feeds only some of the chicks . This spreads the feeding demand equally between the parents . 
 After breeding the adults moult their wing feathers and are temporarily flightless ; migration commences once the flight feathers have regrown . The red @-@ necked grebe is normally single @-@ brooded , although second broods and re @-@ nesting after a clutch has been lost may extend nesting into July or August . 
 Eggs may be destroyed and chicks killed by a range of predators , including the raccoon in North America and the carrion crow in Europe . Pike may take swimming chicks . On average , for each adult , 0 @.@ 65 young birds are still alive by their fourth month , although the mortality rate for the adult is unknown . Red @-@ necked grebes attempt to evade birds of prey by diving ; when feeding , dives average less than 30 seconds , although escape dives are more prolonged . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 On the breeding grounds , the red @-@ necked grebe feeds mainly on invertebrates including adult and larval aquatic insects , such as water beetles and dragonfly larvae , crayfish and molluscs . Fish ( such as smelt ) may be important locally or seasonally , especially for the American subspecies , and crustaceans can constitute up to 20 % of the grebe 's diet . Birds breeding at the coast often make foraging flights to inland lakes or offshore areas to feed . 
 Aquatic prey is obtained by diving or by swimming on surface with the head submerged , and terrestrial insects and their larvae are picked off vegetation . A line slanting downward from the eye to the tip of the opened lower mandible may be used for sighting on prey before diving or when swimming under water . The grebe probably opens its bill and looks down the eye @-@ line toward its target . European breeders , which have to compete with the larger great crested grebe for fish , eat a greater proportion of invertebrates than the longer @-@ billed American subspecies , although both races eat mainly fish in winter . Birds of the nominate subspecies from the northernmost breeding populations in Finland and Russia , beyond the range of great crested grebe , have a longer and more slender bill than those further south , reflecting a greater proportion of fish in the diet where their main competitor is absent . If food is scarce , parents may desert unhatched eggs , or allow the smallest chicks to starve , although the latter strategy appears not to be particularly efficient in protecting the older chicks . 
 Like other grebes , the red @-@ necked grebe ingests large quantities of its own feathers , which remain in the bird 's stomach . Feathers are not only swallowed by adults , mainly during self @-@ preening , but are often fed to the young , sometimes within a day of hatching . These feathers soon decompose into a felt @-@ like , amorphous mass . The function of the feathers in the stomach is unknown , although it has been suggested that they help to protect the lower digestive tract from bones and other hard , indigestible material . 
 = = Status = = 
 The red @-@ necked grebe has a large range , estimated at 1 – 10 million square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 4 – 3 @.@ 8 million square miles ) , and a global population of 150 @,@ 000 – 370 @,@ 000 individuals , with P. g. <unk> about twice as numerous as the nominate race . The population trend has not been quantified , but it is not believed to meet the thresholds for the population decline criterion ( declining more than 30 % in ten years or three generations ) of the IUCN Red List . For these reasons , the species is evaluated as Least Concern . 
 The red @-@ necked grebe is one of the species to which the Agreement on the Conservation of African @-@ Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds ( AEWA ) applies . Parties to the Agreement are required to engage in a wide range of conservation strategies which are describes in a detailed action plan . The plan is intended to address key issues such as species and habitat conservation , management of human activities , research , education , and implementation . 
 The Red @-@ necked Grebe was hunted by humans in northern Europe in the Mesolithic and Paleolithic periods , but there is no evidence that there is any significant level of hunting at the present time . In North America , there are potential threats from pollutants such as polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs ) and pesticides such as DDT which cause reduced reproductive success due to egg sterility and eggshell thinning . Breeding areas may be threatened by the modification and degradation of lakes and by human disturbance from water @-@ based recreational activities . There is no evidence to suggest that these threats could result in a significant risk to the overall population ; more than 70 % of North American red @-@ necked grebes breed in Canada , where the population is stable or increasing . 
 = HMS Inflexible ( 1907 ) = 
 HMS Inflexible was an Invincible @-@ class battlecruiser of the British Royal Navy . She was built before World War I and had an active career during the war . She tried to hunt down the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben and the light cruiser SMS Breslau in the Mediterranean Sea when war broke out and she and her sister ship Invincible sank the German armoured cruisers SMS Scharnhorst and SMS Gneisenau during the Battle of the Falkland Islands . Inflexible bombarded Turkish forts in the Dardanelles in 1915 , but was damaged by return fire and struck a mine while maneuvering . She had to be beached to prevent her from sinking , but she was patched up and sent to Malta , and then Gibraltar for more permanent repairs . Transferred to the Grand Fleet afterwards she damaged the German battlecruiser Lützow during the Battle of Jutland and watched Invincible explode . She was deemed obsolete after the war and was sold for scrap in 1921 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Invincible @-@ class ships were formally known as armoured cruisers until 1911 when they were redesignated as battlecruisers by an Admiralty order of 24 November 1911 . Unofficially a number of designations were used until then , including cruiser @-@ battleship , dreadnought cruiser and battle @-@ cruiser . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Inflexible was significantly larger than her armoured cruiser predecessors of the Minotaur class . She had an overall length of 567 ft ( 173 m ) , a beam of 78 ft 10 @.@ 13 in ( 24 @.@ 0 m ) , and a draught of 29 ft 9 in ( 9 @.@ 07 m ) at deep load . She displaced 17 @,@ 290 long tons ( 17 @,@ 570 t ) at load and 20 @,@ 700 long tons ( 21 @,@ 000 t ) at deep load , nearly 3 @,@ 000 long tons ( 3 @,@ 000 t ) more than the earlier ships . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Inflexible had two paired sets of Parsons direct @-@ drive turbines , each of which was housed in a separate engine @-@ room and drove an outboard and inboard shaft . The high @-@ pressure ahead and astern turbines were coupled to the outboard shafts and the low @-@ pressure turbines to the inner shafts . A cruising turbine was also coupled to each inner shaft ; these were not used often and were eventually disconnected . Her three @-@ bladed propellers were 10 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 20 m ) in diameter on the inner shafts while the outer propellers were 9 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 90 m ) in diameter . The turbines were powered by thirty @-@ one Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers in four boiler rooms . The turbines were designed to produce a total of 41 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 30 @,@ 574 kW ) , but reached nearly 47 @,@ 000 shp ( 35 @,@ 048 kW ) during her trials in 1908 . She was designed for 25 knots ( 29 mph ; 46 km / h ) , but reached 26 @.@ 48 knots ( 30 mph ; 49 km / h ) during trials . Her sister Indomitable maintained an average speed of 25 @.@ 3 knots ( 47 km / h ) for three days during a passage of the North Atlantic in August 1908 . 
 She carried 3 @,@ 084 long tons ( 3 @,@ 133 t ) of coal , and an additional 725 long tons ( 737 t ) of fuel oil that was to be sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . At full fuel capacity , she could steam for 3 @,@ 090 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 720 km ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Inflexible mounted eight BL 12 @-@ inch ( 304 @.@ 8 mm ) Mk X guns in four twin hydraulically powered turrets . Her secondary armament consisted of sixteen 4 in ( 102 mm ) QF Mk III guns . During 1915 the turret roof guns were transferred to the superstructure and the total number of guns was reduced to twelve . All of the remaining guns were enclosed in casemates and given blast shields at that time to better protect the gun crews from weather and enemy action . These guns were replaced by twelve 4 @-@ inch BL MK IX guns on CPI mountings during 1917 . 
 Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of a single QF 3 inch 20 cwt AA gun on a high @-@ angle MKII mount at the aft end of the superstructure that was carried from July 1915 . A 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss gun on a high @-@ angle MkIc mounting with a maximum elevation of 60 ° was fitted in November 1914 and used until August 1917 . A 4 @-@ inch BL MK VII on a HA MkII mount was added in April 1917 . Five 18 @-@ inch ( 450 @-@ mm ) submerged torpedo tubes were fitted on the Invincibles , two on each side and one in the stern . Fourteen torpedoes were carried for them . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The armour protection given to the Invincibles was heavier than that of the Minotaurs — their waterline belt measured 6 inches ( 152 mm ) amidships in contrast to the 4 inches ( 102 mm ) belt of their predecessors . The belt was 6 inches thick roughly between the fore and aft 12 @-@ inch gun turrets , but was reduced to four inches from the fore turret to the bow , but did not extend aft of the rear turret . The gun turrets and barbettes were protected by 7 in ( 178 mm ) of armour , except for the turret roofs which used 3 in ( 76 mm ) of Krupp non @-@ cemented armour ( KNC ) . The thickness of the main deck was 1 – 2 in ( 25 – 51 mm ) and the lower deck armour was 1 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 5 in ( 38 – 64 mm ) . Mild steel torpedo bulkheads of 2 @.@ 5 @-@ inch thickness were fitted abreast the magazines and shell rooms . 
 After the Battle of Jutland revealed her vulnerability to plunging shellfire , additional armour was added in the area of the magazines and to the turret roofs . The exact thickness is not known , but it was unlikely to be thick as the total amount was less than 100 long tons ( 102 t ) . 
 = = Construction = = 
 She was authorized in the naval expansion program of 1905 , and built at the John Brown & Company shipyard on the Clyde . She was laid down on 5 February 1906 , launched on 26 June 1907 , and commissioned on 20 October 1908 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Upon commissioning , Inflexible was assigned to the Nore Division of the British Home Fleet . She was the temporary flagship of Admiral of the Fleet Sir Edward Hobart Seymour while in New York for the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration in September 1909 . On 26 May 1911 , she was in a collision with the battleship Bellerophon that damaged her bow . She was refitted in October – November 1911 , where her fore funnel was also raised by 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) to reduce smoke interference with the bridge . 
 = = World War I = = 
 = = = Pursuit of Goeben and Breslau = = = 
 On the outbreak of World War I , Inflexible was flagship of the Mediterranean Fleet . Accompanied by HMS Indefatigable , under the command of Admiral Sir Archibald Berkeley Milne she encountered the German battlecruiser Goeben and the light cruiser Breslau on the morning of 4 August 1914 headed east after a cursory bombardment of the French Algerian port of Philippeville , but Britain and Germany were not yet at war so Milne turned to shadow the Germans as they headed back to Messina to recoal . All three battlecruisers had problems with their boilers , but Goeben and Breslau were able to break contact and reached Messina by the morning of the 5th . By this time war had been declared , after the German invasion of Belgium , but an Admiralty order to respect Italian neutrality and stay outside a six @-@ mile ( 10 km ) limit from the Italian coast precluded entrance into the passage of the Strait of Messina where they could observe the port directly . Therefore Milne stationed Inflexible and Indefatigable at the northern exit of the Strait of Messina , still expecting the Germans to break out to the west where they could attack French troop transports , the light cruiser Gloucester at the southern exit and sent Indomitable to recoal at Bizerte where she was better positioned to react to a German sortie into the Western Mediterranean . 
 The Germans sortied from Messina on 6 August and headed east , towards Constantinople , trailed by Gloucester . Milne , still expecting Rear Admiral Wilhelm Souchon to turn west , kept the battlecruisers at Malta until shortly after midnight on 8 August when he set sail for Cape Matapan at a leisurely 12 knots ( 22 km / h ) , where Goeben had been spotted eight hours earlier . At 2 : 30 p.m. he received an incorrect signal from the Admiralty stating that Britain was at war with Austria — war would not be declared until 12 August and the order was countermanded four hours later , but Milne followed his standing orders to guard the Adriatic against an Austrian breakout attempt , rather than seek Goeben . Finally on 9 August Milne was given clear orders to " chase Goeben which had passed Cape Matapan on the 7th steering north @-@ east . " Milne still did not believe that Souchon was heading for the Dardanelles , and so he resolved to guard the exit from the Aegean , unaware that the Goeben did not intend to come out . Indomitable remained in the Mediterranean to blockade the Dardanelles , but Inflexible was ordered home on 18 August . 
 = = = Battle of the Falklands = = = 
 The West Indies Squadron of Rear Admiral Christopher Cradock was destroyed by the German German East Asia Squadron commanded by Admiral Graf von Spee during the Battle of Coronel on 1 November 1914 . In response , the Admiralty ordered that a squadron be sent to destroy the Germans . The squadron , under the command of Admiral Sir Doveton Sturdee , consisted of Invincible ( flag ) and Inflexible . They departed on 11 November and rendezvoused with several other cruisers under Rear Admiral Stoddard at Abrolhos Rocks , off the coast of Brazil on the 26th . They departed the following day and reached Port Stanley on the morning of 7 December . 
 Spee , making a leisurely voyage back to the Atlantic , wished to destroy the radio station at Port Stanley and sent the armoured cruiser SMS Gneisenau and the light cruiser Nürnberg to see if the harbor was clear of British warships on the morning of 8 December . They were spotted at 7 : 30 AM , although the pre @-@ dreadnought Canopus , grounded in Stanley Harbor to defend the town and its wireless station , did not receive the signal until 7 : 45 . It mattered little because Sturdee was not expecting an engagement and most of his ships were coaling . Furthermore the armoured cruiser Cornwall and the light cruiser Bristol had one or both of their engines under repair . The armed merchant cruiser Macedonian was patrolling the outer harbor entrance while the armoured cruiser Kent was anchored in the outer harbor , scheduled to relieve the Macedonian at 8 : 00 AM . The Germans were not expecting any resistance and the first salvo from Canopus 's guns at 9 : 20 caused them to sheer off from their planned bombardment of the wireless station and fall back on Spee 's main body . 
 Sturdee 's ships did not sortie from the harbor until 9 : 50 , but they could see the retreating German ships on the southwest horizon . The Invincibles , fresh out of dry dock , had a 5 knots ( 5 @.@ 8 mph ; 9 @.@ 3 km / h ) advantage over Spee 's ships which all had fouled bottoms that limited their speeds to 20 knots ( 23 mph ; 37 km / h ) at best . The light cruiser SMS Leipzig was lagging behind the other ships and Inflexible opened fire on her when the range dropped to 17 @,@ 500 yards ( 16 @.@ 0 km ) at 12 : 55 PM . Invincible opened fire shortly afterwards and both ships began straddling Leipzig as the range closed to 13 @,@ 000 yards ( 12 km ) . At 1 : 20 Spee ordered his squadron to separate and ordered his light cruisers to turn to the southwest while his armoured cruisers turned to the north east to cover their retreat . The German ships opened fire first at 1 : 30 and scored their first hit at 1 : 44 when SMS Scharnhorst hit Invincible , although the shell burst harmlessly on the belt armour . Both sides fired rapidly during the first half @-@ hour of the engagement before Sturdee opened up the range a little to put his ships outside the effective range of the German guns . British gunnery was very poor during this period , scoring only four hits out of 210 rounds fired . The primary cause was the smoke from the guns and funnels as the British were downwind of the Germans . 
 Spee turned to the south in the hope of disengaging while the British had their vision obscured , but only opened the range to 17 @,@ 000 yards ( 16 km ) before the British saw his course change . This was futile as the British battlecruisers gave chase at 24 knots ( 28 mph ; 44 km / h ) . Forty minutes later the British opened fire again at 15 @,@ 000 yards ( 14 km ) . Eight minutes later Spee turned again to the east to give battle . This time his strategy was to close the range on the British ships so he could bring his 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) secondary armament into play . In this he was successful and they were able to open fire at 3 : 00 at maximum elevation . On this course the smoke bothered both sides , but multiple hits were made regardless . Those made by the Germans either failed to detonate or hit in some insignificant area . On the contrary , Gneisenau had her starboard engine room put out of action . Sturdee ordered his ships at 3 : 15 back across their own wakes to gain the windward advantage . Spee turned to the northwest , as if to attempt to cross the British T , but actually to bring Scharnhorst 's undamaged starboard guns to bear as most of those on his port side were out of action . The British continued to hit Scharnhorst and Gneisenau regularly during this time and Scharnhorst ceased fire at 4 : 00 before capsizing at 4 : 17 with no survivors . Gneisenau had been slowed by earlier damage and was battered for another hour and a half by Inflexible and Invincible at ranges down to 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) . Despite the damage her crew continued to fire back until she ceased firing at 4 : 47 . Sturdee was ready to order ' Cease fire ' at 5 : 15 when an ammunition hoist was freed up and she made her last shot . The British continued to pound her until 5 : 50 , after her captain had given the order to scuttle her at 5 : 40 . She slowly capsized at 6 : 00 and the British were able to rescue 176 men . She had fired 661 12 @-@ inch shells during the battle and had only been hit three times because she was often obscured by Invincible 's smoke . Only one man was killed and five wounded aboard the battlecruisers during the battle . 
 = = = Dardanelles Campaign = = = 
 After the Battle of the Falklands Inflexible was repaired and refitted at Gibraltar . She arrived at the Dardanelles on 24 January 1915 where she replaced Indefatigable as the flagship of the Mediterranean Fleet . She bombarded Turkish fortifications on 19 February , the start of the Battle of Gallipoli , to little effect , and again on 15 March , with the same results . She was part of the first line of British ships on 18 March as they attempted to suppress the Turkish guns so the minefields could be swept . Turkish return fire was heavy and she was hit a number of times . A 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) howitzer shell knocked out the left gun of ' P ' turret , a 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) shell hit the yard above the foretop and killed or wounded everybody within . A heavy shell of unknown size hit her on the port side 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) below the waterline , but only dished in the side plating . A 240 mm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) shell hit the foremast at the same level as the flying bridge and set fire to the navigator 's sea cabin . The hit destroyed all the cables and voice pipes running through the foremast to the fire control director . The smoke from the fire was choking the wounded so she withdrew to turn her head to into the wind and the fire was then quickly put out . She returned to reengage the Turkish forts and was hit once more with little effect . Later , as she was turning in Eren <unk> Bay , she was seriously damaged by a mine , probably about 100 kg ( 220 lb ) in size , that blew a large hole in her starboard bow and flooded the forward torpedo flat , drowning 39 men . She had to be beached at the island of <unk> ( Tenedos ) to prevent her sinking , as she had taken in some 1 @,@ 600 long tons ( 1 @,@ 600 t ) of water , but she was temporarily repaired with a cofferdam over the 30 by 26 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m × 7 @.@ 9 m ) hole . She sailed to Malta , escorted by Canopus and Talbot on 6 April . She nearly foundered when her cofferdam worked loose in heavy weather en route and had to be towed stern @-@ first by Canopus for six hours while the cofferdam was repaired . She was under repair at Malta until early June before she sailed for home . She reached the U.K. on 19 June where she joined the 3rd Battlecruiser Squadron ( BCS ) of the Grand Fleet under the command of Rear Admiral <unk> Hood . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 At the end of May 1916 , the 3rd BCS was temporarily assigned to the Grand Fleet for gunnery practice . On 30 May , the entire Grand Fleet , along with Admiral Beatty 's battlecruisers , was ordered to sea to prepare for an excursion by the German High Seas Fleet . In order to support Beatty , Admiral Hood took his three battlecruisers ahead of the Grand Fleet . At about 2 : 30 PM Invincible intercepted a radio message from the British light cruiser Galatea , attached to Beatty 's Battlecruiser Force , reporting the sighting of two enemy cruisers . This was amplified by other reports of seven enemy ships steering north . Hood interpreted this as an attempt to escape through the Skagerrak and ordered an increase in speed to 22 knots ( 41 km / h ) at 3 : 11 and steered East @-@ Southeast to cut off the fleeing ships . Twenty minutes later Invincible intercepted a message from Beatty reporting five enemy battlecruisers in sight and later signals reporting that he was engaging the enemy on a south @-@ easterly course . At 4 : 06 Hood ordered full speed and a course of south @-@ southeast in an attempt to converge on Beatty . At 4 : 56 , with no British ships in sight , Hood requested Beatty 's course , position and speed , but never received a reply . 
 Hood continued on course until 5 : 40 when gunfire was spotted in the direction to which his light cruiser Chester had been dispatched to investigate other gunfire flashes . Chester encountered four light cruisers of Hipper 's 2nd Scouting Group and was badly damaged before Hood turned to investigate and was able to drive the German cruisers away . At 5 : 53 Invincible opened fire on Wiesbaden and the other two Invincibles followed two minutes later . The German ships turned for the south after fruitlessly firing torpedoes at 6 : 00 and attempted to find shelter in the mist . As they turned Invincible hit Wiesbaden in the engine room and knocked out her engines while Inflexible hit Pillau once . The 2nd Scouting Group was escorted by the light cruiser Regensburg and 31 destroyers of the 2nd and 9th Flotillas and the 12th Half @-@ Flotilla which attacked the 3rd BCS in succession . They were driven off by Hood 's remaining light cruiser Canterbury and the five destroyers of his escort . In a confused action the Germans only launched 12 torpedoes and disabled the destroyer Shark with gunfire . Having turned due west to close on Beatty 's ships , the Invincibles were broadside to the oncoming torpedoes , but Invincible turned north , while Inflexible and Indomitable turned south to present their narrowest profile to the torpedoes . All the torpedoes missed , although one passed underneath Inflexible without detonating . As Invincible turned north , her helm jammed and she had to come to a stop to fix the problem , but this was quickly done and the squadron reformed heading west . 
 At 6 : 21 , with both Beatty and the Grand Fleet converging on him , Hood turned south to lead Beatty 's battlecruisers . Hipper 's battlecruisers were 9 @,@ 000 yards ( 8 @.@ 2 km ) away and the Invincibles almost immediately opened fire on Hipper 's flagship , Lützow , and Derfflinger . Lützow quickly took 10 hits from Lion , Inflexible and Invincible , including two hits below the waterline forward by Invincible that would ultimately doom her . But at 6 : 30 , Invincible abruptly appeared as a clear target before Lützow and Derfflinger . The two German ships then fired three salvoes each at Invincible , and sank her in 90 seconds . A 305 mm ( 12 @-@ inch ) shell from the third salvo struck the roof of Invincible 's midships ' Q ' turret , flash detonated the magazines below , and the ship blew up and broke in two , killing all but six of her crew of 1 @,@ 032 officers and men , including Rear @-@ Admiral Hood . 
 Inflexible and Indomitable remained in company with Beatty for the rest of the battle . They encountered Hipper 's battlecruisers only 10 @,@ 000 yards ( 9 @.@ 1 km ) away as the sun was setting about 8 : 19 and opened fire . Seydlitz was hit five times before the German battlecruisers were rescued by the appearance of the pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of Rear Admiral Mauve and the British shifted fire to the new threat . Three of the predreadnoughts were hit before they too were able to turn into the gloom . 
 = = = Post @-@ Jutland career = = = 
 The loss of three battlecruisers at Jutland ( the others were Queen Mary and Indefatigable ) led to the force being reorganised into two squadrons , with Inflexible and Indomitable in the 2nd BCS . However , after Jutland there was little significant naval activity for the Invincibles , other than routine patrolling , thanks to the Kaiser 's order that his ships should not be allowed to go to sea unless assured of victory . Two torpedoes fired by the German U @-@ boat U @-@ 65 during one of these patrols on 19 August 1916 missed astern . On 1 February 1918 she collided with the British submarine HMS K22 off the Isle of May with minor damage . She was fitted with two flying off ramps fitted above her midships turrets in early 1918 . On 21 November she was present at Scapa Flow for the surrender of the German High Seas Fleet . 
 The end of the war saw the end for many of the older vessels , not least the two remaining Invincible @-@ class ships . Inflexible was paid off to the Reserve Fleet in January 1919 before being decommissioned on 31 March 1920 . Chile briefly considered purchasing the ship in 1920 , however the sale did not materialise . She was sold for scrap on 1 December 1921 , and scrapped in Germany the following year . Mount Inflexible in the Canadian Rockies was named after the battlecruiser in 1917 . 
 = Into the Groove = 
 " Into the Groove " is a song by American singer Madonna from the 1985 film Desperately Seeking Susan . It was featured on the re @-@ issue of her second studio album Like a Virgin ( 1984 ) , and released on July 23 , 1985 , by Sire Records as the album 's fourth single outside North America . The original song was included on her third greatest hits album , Celebration ( 2009 ) , while remixes of it appeared on the remix compilation You Can Dance ( 1987 ) , and her first greatest hits compilation The Immaculate Collection ( 1990 ) . 
 Madonna 's inspiration behind the song was the dance floor , and she wrote it while watching a handsome Puerto Rican man , across her balcony . Initially written for her friend Mark Kamins , Madonna later decided to use it as the soundtrack of her film Desperately Seeking Susan . " Into the Groove " was recorded at Sigma Sound Studios . A remixed version , titled " Into the Hollywood Groove " , was created by Madonna in 2003 for a Gap commercial and featured a rap by Missy Elliott . " Into the Groove " consists of instrumentation from synthesizers and drum machines . Madonna 's voice is double tracked in the chorus ; the song also consists of musical contrasts , overdubs , and Madonna 's voice in lower register during the bridge . The lyrics of the song are simple , written as an invitation to dance with the singer . However , it carries sexual innuendos and undertones in the meaning . 
 The song was appreciated by contemporary critics as well as authors , who frequently called it " Madonna 's first great single " . The song was a commercial success , reaching the top of the charts in Australia , Belgium , Ireland , Italy , Japan , Netherlands , New Zealand , Spain and the United Kingdom , where it was Madonna 's first number @-@ one single . In the United States , the song was only available as the B @-@ side of the 12 @-@ inch single of " Angel " , therefore it was ineligible to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 according to the rules at the time . By the end of the 1980s , " Into the Groove " was honored by Billboard magazine as the Dance Single of the Decade . 
 A music video , consisting of clips from the film , was released to accompany the song . The song has been performed by Madonna in most of her concert tours , including the Sticky & Sweet Tour ( 2008 – 09 ) , where she performed it while doing Double Dutch jump rope . " Into the Groove " has been covered by a number of artists , including Australian singer Dannii Minogue , who combined the song with her single " Don 't Wanna Lose This Feeling " . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Into the Groove " was written and produced by Madonna and her then @-@ boyfriend Stephen Bray . The singer had initially written the song for her friend Mark Kamins ' protégée , <unk> , and recorded a demo which Kamins intended to modify later . However , Madonna believed that the song would be more suitable for her film Desperately Seeking Susan , and recorded it with Bray for the film 's soundtrack . When Kamins found out he was furious that Madonna did not inform him that she would use the song for the film . The singer retorted : " I 'm tough , I 'm ambitious and I know exactly what I want . If that makes me a bitch , that 's okay . " " Into the Groove " ultimately did not appear on the soundtrack album of the film , but was released on the 1985 worldwide re @-@ issue of Madonna 's second studio album , Like a Virgin . During an interview with Time , Madonna said that she wrote the song while watching a Latin boy across her balcony . Describing the song as " dorky " , Madonna further explained : 
 " When I was writing it , I was sitting in a fourth @-@ floor walk @-@ up on Avenue @-@ B , and there was this gorgeous Puerto Rican boy sitting across me that I wanted to go out on a date with , and I just wanted to get the song over with . I ultimately did go out with him and the song was finished just before my last date with him , which I 'm kinda happy that it did not continue ... The dance floor was quite a magical place for me . I started off wanting to be a dancer , so that had a lot to do with the song . The freedom that I always feel when I 'm dancing , that feeling of inhabiting your body , letting yourself go , expressing yourself through music . I always thought of it as a magical place – even if you 're not taking ecstasy . Hence that came to me as the primary inspiration for ' Into the Groove ' . " 
 " Into the Groove " had an accompanying music video , made up of clips from the film , with the lyrics often matching the images . Doug <unk> of Parallax Productions , a company that pioneered in movie tie @-@ in music videos during the 1980s , created this video from edited footage of the movie , directed by Susan <unk> . This was done because there were five Madonna videos already on power rotation on MTV , and Warner Bros. did not want the audience to be saturated with any new video . Hence , they decided to use the shots from the film and made a music video . During a 2009 interview with Rolling Stone , Madonna commented : " ' Into the Groove ' is another song I feel retarded singing , but everybody seems to like it . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 Madonna and Bray started on the re @-@ recording and changed some portion of the lyrics . Bray commented on the recording sessions as : " I 've always kind of made the rib cage and the skeleton [ music ] of the song already – she 's there for the last things like the eyebrows and the haircut [ lyrics ] . She writes in a stream of mood really . " " Into the Groove " was recorded at Sigma Sound Studios . Madonna 's friend Erika Belle was present during the recording and watched the whole process . In Andrew Morton 's Madonna biography , she noted that at one point of the recording , Bray was facing difficulties with the bridge of the song , as the melody thought by him was not syncing with the rest of the composition . Undeterred by his obvious difficulties , Madonna stepped up to the microphone and sang the words " Live out your fantasy here with me " . Bray 's problem was solved ; Belle remembered the experience as : " [ The song ] seemed to come out of her , I was awestruck . " 
 Madonna re @-@ tailored the song in 2003 , and developed a remix called " Into the Hollywood Groove " , which replaced the first verse of " Into the Groove " with the first verse of Madonna 's single " Hollywood " ( 2003 ) . The lyrics of the chorus were also slightly altered and it featured a rap by Missy Elliott . This version of the song was used for a Gap commercial in the summer of 2003 , featuring Madonna and Elliot wearing Gap jeans . Another remix version was created by Josh Harris and Omar Galeano as " The Passengerz " , and was included in Madonna 's remix album , Remixed & Revisited ( 2003 ) . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Into the Groove " begins with a spoken introduction by Madonna , and the sound of drums and synth bassline being heard . This is followed by the chorus , where Madonna 's voice is double tracked and the treble is increased by a notch . A synth line counterpoints the main tune , adding a contrast . The bridge , where Madonna sings the line " Live out your fantasy " , features her vocals in a lower register alongside the main ones . According to the sheet music published in Musicnotes.com by Alfred Publishing Co . Inc . , the song is set in the time signature of common time with a medium tempo of 116 beats per minute . The song is set in the key of C minor with Madonna 's voice spanning from the high @-@ tone of C4 to the low @-@ tone of D5 . It has a basic sequence of Cm7 – B ♭ / C – Cm7 – A ♭ as its chord progression . 
 The song was remixed by Shep Pettibone for Madonna 's remix compilation You Can Dance ( 1987 ) . In the remixed version , overdubs are present with the continuous repetition of the phrase " c 'mon " . The first verse does not start until about ninety seconds into the remix . After the first " Now I know you 're mine " line is sung , there is a percussion break , and repetition of the phrases " step to the beat " and " c 'mon " . The last verse incorporates echoing on the vocals , causing overlap of the phrases . The remix ends with instrumentation from congas , whistles and timbales , giving it a Mexican ending . Pettibone also remixed the song alongside Goh Hotoda for The Immaculate Collection ( 1990 ) compilation . 
 The lyrics of the song are simple , written as an invitation to dance with the singer . Despite the simple lyrics , it carries sexual innuendos and undertones in the meaning . Similar to Madonna 's previous single " Like a Virgin " ( 1984 ) , a lyrical hook is also present in " Into the Groove " , directed at shy girls . The line " At night I lock the door so no @-@ one else can see " implied that Madonna was not as brazen as her provocative image suggested . According to Barker , the nostalgic people would instantly recognize the song 's lyrics at night clubs . He added that the line , " Only when I 'm dancing can I feel this free , " expresses the freedom that a dance floor brings about , with the dancers happy to find freedom in the music . A <unk> is visible in the line " Live out your fantasy here with me " , which Barker believed , blurred the boundaries of reality and brought one closer to the world of fantasy . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Ever since its release , " Into the Groove " has received critical acclaim . J. Randy Taraborrelli , author of Madonna : An Intimate Biography , said that the song demonstrated Madonna 's ability to create <unk> dance music . Rikky Rooksby , author of Madonna : the complete guide to her music , said that " ' Into the Groove ' will make you feel like you 're a winner either way . And that 's one of the best things pop music can do for ya . [ It 's ] Madonna 's first great single . " Clive Barker and Simon <unk> , authors of New Theatre Quarterly , felt that the song was the first disco @-@ anthem of the 1980s . 
 Toby Cresswell , author of 1001 Songs : The Great Songs of All Time and the Artists , Stories and Secrets , said that the song is a " sweet , limited white tune on the top , and there 's Madonna – all the right @-@ shop chic – dragging the straight world into this subterranean paradise . All the magic of the eighties is right here . " Matthew Rettenmund , author of Totally Awesome 80s : A Lexicon of the Music , Videos , Movies , TV Shows , Stars , and Trends of that Decadent Decade , declared " Into the Groove " as the ultimate 1980s song and felt that it " cemented Madonna 's place as the dancing queen of the era " . Dawn Keetley and John Pettigrew , authors of Public Women , Public Words : A Documentary History of American Feminism , called it a " mesmerizing theme song " . 
 Santiago Fouz @-@ Hernández and Freya Jarman @-@ Ivens , authors of Madonna 's drowned worlds : new approaches to her cultural transformations , commented that the song " taunted playfully " . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine ranked it at twenty @-@ nine on the list of " 100 Greatest Dance Songs " . He commented : " It 's hard to imagine the most famous woman in the world dancing alone in her bedroom at night , locking the doors so ' no one else can see ' ( as she sings on ' Groove ' ) , even 20 years ago , but you can 't help but believe her . The song — and Madonna 's performance — are that good . " Alfred Soto from Stylus commented that " ' Into the Groove ' itself is as much wish @-@ fulfillment as ' Crazy For You ' . Austin Scaggs from Rolling Stone commented that the song had " an amazing bassline " . 
 By the end of the 1980s , " Into the Groove " was honored by Billboard magazine as the " Dance Single of the Decade " . In 2003 , Madonna fans were asked to vote for their top @-@ twenty Madonna singles of all @-@ time by Q magazine ; " Into the Groove " was allocated the number @-@ three spot . In 2009 , the song was ranked at ninety on Blender magazine 's " The 500 Greatest Songs Since You Were Born " . Billboard ranked the song number three on a 2015 list of Madonna 's top 15 best songs , calling it " the Madonna club track . " In 2015 the song was voted by the British public as the nation 's 19th favourite 1980s number one in a poll for ITV . Pitchfork Media named " Into the Groove " the 17th best song from the 1980s . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , due to similar problems with " Crazy for You " and " Material Girl " being released at the same time and competing with each other , it was decided against releasing " Into the Groove " as a 7 " single so it would not compete with " Angel " , the third single from the Like a Virgin . " Into the Groove " was eventually released as the B @-@ side to the maxi @-@ single of " Angel " , therefore it was ineligible to enter the Billboard Hot 100 or Hot Singles Sales charts . The song debuted at number 40 on Hot Dance Club Songs chart , as a double A @-@ side with " Angel " , on the issue dated June 1 , 1985 . After four weeks , it reached the top of the chart and also reached number 19 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . " Into the Groove " is Madonna 's most played song on Billboard 's Recurrent Airplay Chart . On July 30 , 1985 , " Angel / Into the Groove " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of one million copies across the US — the requirement for a gold single prior to 1989 . It was the first 12 @-@ inch single to be certified gold since Frankie Smith 's " Double Dutch Bus " ( 1981 ) . The song placed at number 12 on the Dance year @-@ end charts and sold approximately 600 @,@ 000 copies of the 12 " ; it also reached number @-@ one on the Hot Dance Singles Sales chart . 
 " Into the Groove " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number four , on the chart dated July 27 , 1985 . It reached the top of the chart and stayed there for four weeks , and was present for a total of 14 weeks on the chart . The song was Madonna 's first number @-@ one single in United Kingdom . During its stay at number @-@ one , Madonna 's first UK hit " Holiday " was at number @-@ two position . This made her the first female artist in UK chart history to hold the top @-@ two positions of the chart simultaneously . " Into the Groove " was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipment of 500 @,@ 000 copies of the single . The song was the third biggest selling UK single of 1985 , behind Jennifer Rush 's " The Power of Love " and Elaine Paige 's and Barbara Dickson 's " I Know Him So Well " . According to the Official Charts Company , the song has sold 870 @,@ 000 copies there . In Australia , " Into the Groove " charted as a combined single with " Angel " and reached the top of the Kent Music Report chart . It was the second @-@ highest selling single of 1985 in Australia . Across Europe and Oceania , the song was able to reach the top of the charts in Belgium , Ireland , Italy , Japan , Netherlands , New Zealand and Spain , and inside the top five in France , Germany , Norway , Sweden , Switzerland and European Hot 100 Singles chart . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Madonna has performed " Into the Groove " on The Virgin Tour and the Live Aid concert ( 1985 ) , the Who 's That Girl World Tour ( 1987 ) , the Blond Ambition World Tour ( 1990 ) , the Re @-@ Invention World Tour ( 2004 ) , the Sticky & Sweet Tour ( 2008 – 09 ) , and the Rebel Heart Tour ( 2015 – 16 ) . 
 In The Virgin Tour , " Into the Groove " was the third song of the setlist . Madonna wore a blue see @-@ through crop @-@ top , revealing her characteristic black bra . She had lacy leggings and crucifixes around her ear and her neck . Her hair was tied at the top and fell in unkempt manner around her ears . She had a tambourine in her hand like her two male dancers , and together they sang the song while standing in front of a microphone , in tandem . The performance was included on the video release titled Live – The Virgin Tour , shot in Detroit . She also performed it on her Live Aid concert on July 13 , 1985 . 
 In the Who 's That Girl World Tour of 1987 , " Into the Groove " was the second @-@ last song before the encore . The outfit she wore during the performance was inspired by artist Andy Warhol . It consisted of a loose pant with a tin of Campbell 's soup on the side , the letter U in the front and the word DANCE in the back ; it was designed so that when she turned , audience were able to read ' U [ Can ] Dance ] ' . In the middle of her singing , a young boy joined her on stage to dance alongside . Madonna then wore a pink bolero jacket . At the end she is joined by her backup singers and dancers . Together they take a bow to the audience and finish the performance . Two different performances of the song on this tour can be found on the videos : Who 's That Girl – Live in Japan , filmed in Tokyo on June 22 , 1987 , and Ciao Italia : Live from Italy , filmed in Turin on September 4 , 1987 . 
 Three years later on the Blond Ambition World Tour , " Into the Groove " was again performed before the encore . Madonna , her backup singers Niki Haris and Donna De Lory were portrayed as being seduced by three macho guys in leather jackets . The girls asked the guys to " prove their love to them " and wondered if they would wear a condom when necessary . After that , they sing the Shep Pettibone extended remix of " Into The Groove " . Two different performances were taped and released on video , the Blond Ambition – Japan Tour 90 , taped in Yokohama on April 27 , 1990 , and the Blond Ambition World Tour Live , taped in Nice , France , on August 5 , 1990 . 
 In the Re @-@ Invention World Tour of 2004 , Madonna included the song at the start of the final segment , which started with Scottish bagpiper players parading around the stage in kilts and playing drums and pipes . Madonna appeared onstage in similar long kilts and a white sleeveless T @-@ shirt to perform " Into the Groove " with Scottish bagpiper group Lorne Cousin . Rapper Missy Elliott appeared on the video screen for a rap interlude . The song was again added to the setlist of 2008 – 09 Sticky & Sweet Tour . Elements of Cassius 's " Toop Toop " , Frankie Smith 's " Double Dutch Bus " , The Sugarhill Gang 's " Apache ( Jump On It ) " and Madonna 's own " Jump " were added to the performance . " Into the Groove " marked the beginning of the second segment titled Old School . It began with Madonna appearing on the stage in shorts and T @-@ shirt , while skipping to a DJ station . She started singing the song while cartoon characters from late artist , and Madonna 's friend , Keith Haring dance on the backdrops . Near the end of the song , Madonna performed a Double Dutch dance interlude . 
 In 2015 , " Into the Groove " was included in the set list of the Rebel Heart Tour , performed in a flamenco @-@ style medley with " Dress You Up " , " Everybody " and " Lucky Star " . During the sequence the singer dressed by in a Latin and gypsy inspired dress , created by Alessandro Michele for Gucci consisting off a shawl , flamenco hat , lace , skirts and jacquard bodysuit . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 The song was covered by alternative rock band Sonic Youth under the pseudonym Ciccone Youth for a 1986 single , and re @-@ titled " Into the Groove ( y ) " ; this recording also appears on the 1988 release The Whitey Album . Dale Bozzio , former lead singer of new wave band Missing Persons , covered the song for the Madonna tribute album Virgin Voices : A Tribute To Madonna , Vol . 2 from 2000 . French pop / rock group Superbus covered " Into the Groove " for their 2002 album , <unk> . It was the third and final single from the album . 
 In 2003 , the song was combined with the vocals of Dannii Minogue 's " Don 't Wanna Lose This Feeling " , the fourth and final single from her album Neon Nights . " Into the Groove " ' s instrumentation and a small Madonna vocal sample were added to Minogue 's vocals , though Minogue 's pitch was altered to fit the tempo of the song . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – writer , vocals , producer 
 Steve Bray – writer , producer 
 Shep Pettibone – audio mixing , additional production , audio editing 
 Andy Wallace – remix engineering 
 The Latin Rascals – audio editing 
 Herb Ritts – photography 
 Credits adapted from the Like a Virgin ( 1985 re @-@ issue ) and You Can Dance album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Shahrbaraz = 
 Shahrbaraz ( Persian : <unk> ) or Shahrvaraz ( Middle Persian : <unk> ) ( died 9 June 630 ) was king of the Sasanian Empire from 27 April 629 to 9 June 630 . He usurped the throne from Ardashir III , and was killed by Sasanian nobles after forty days . Before usurping the Sasanian throne he was a general ( spahbed ) under Khosrau II ( 590 – 628 ) . He is furthermore noted for his important role during the climactic Byzantine – Sasanian War of 602 – 628 , and the events that followed afterwards . His name Shahrbaraz is actually an honorific title , and means " the Boar of the Empire " , attesting to his dexterity in military command and his warlike person , as the boar was the animal associated with the Zoroastrian <unk> <unk> , the epitome of victory . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Shahrbaraz belonged to the House of Mihran , one of the Seven Parthian clans ; he was the son of a certain Ardashir . During Shahrbaraz 's later life , he joined the Sasanian army , where he rose to high offices , and was appointed as spahbed of <unk> . He was married to the sister of the Sasanian king Khosrau II , <unk> , whom Shahrbaraz had one boy with named Shapur @-@ i Shahrvaraz . Shahrbaraz also had another son named Niketas the Persian , who may be from the same woman or from another . 
 = = War against the Byzantine Empire = = 
 Shahrbaraz is first mentioned when Khosrau II started the last and most devastating of the Byzantine – Sasanian wars , which was going to last 26 years . Khosrau II , along with Shahrbaraz and his other best generals , conquered Dara and Edessa in 604 , and in the north , the Byzantines were driven back to the old , pre @-@ 591 frontier before Khosrau II gave them most of Sasanian Armenia , parts of Mesopotamia and western half of the Kingdom of Iberia . After reconquering lost territory , Khosrau II withdrew from the battlefield and handed military operations to his best generals . Shahrbaraz was one of them . In 610 , Heraclius , an Armenian of probable Arsacid descent , revolted against the Byzantine Emperor Phocas and killed him , crowning himself as Emperor of the Byzantine Empire . After becoming Byzantine Emperor , he prepared a major counter @-@ attack against the Sasanians outside Antioch in 613 , but was decisively defeated by Shahrbaraz , who inflicted heavy losses on the Byzantine army and then captured the city , giving the Sasanians naval access to the Mediterranean sea . 
 After the Byzantine defeat outside Antioch , Heraclius and his brother Theodore , along with General Nicetas , combined their armies in Syria , but were defeated by Shahrbaraz and his forces who besieged Damascus and captured it along with a large number of Byzantine troops as prisoners . Furthermore , Shahrbaraz also defeated a Byzantine army near <unk> 'at , which was important enough for the Arabs to write it down in Quran . 
 One of most important events during his career was when he led the Sasanian army towards Palaestina , and after a bloody siege captured Jerusalem , a city sacred to the Christians . After his conquest of Jerusalem the Holy Cross was carried away in triumph . In 618 , Shahrbaraz was ordered by Khosrau II to invade Egypt , and by 619 , Alexandria , the capital of Byzantine Egypt , was in Sasanian hands . 
 After the fall of Alexandria , Shahrbaraz and his forces extended Sasanian rule southwards along the Nile . By 621 , the province was securely in Sasanian hands , and a certain <unk> was appointed as its governor . In 622 , Heraclius counter @-@ attacked against the Sasanian Empire in Anatolia . Shahrbaraz was sent over there to deal with him , but was eventually defeated by him . 
 After Heraclius ' victory , he marched towards Caucasian Albania and wintered there . Shahrbaraz , along with Shahin and Shahraplakan were later sent by the orders of Khosrau II to trap the forces of Heraclius . Shahin managed to rout the Byzantine army . Due to jealousy between the Sasanian commanders , Shahrbaraz hurried with his army to take part in the glory of the victory . Heraclius met them at Tigranakert and routed the forces of Shahraplakan and Shahin one after the other . After this victory , Heraclius crossed the Araxes and camped in the plains on the other side . Shahin , with the remnants of both his and Shahraplakan 's armies joined Shahrbaraz in the pursuit of Heraclius , but marshes slowed them down . At <unk> , Shahrbaraz split his forces , sending some 6 @,@ 000 troops to ambush Heraclius while the remainder of the troops stayed at <unk> . Heraclius launched a surprise night attack on the Sasanian main camp in February 625 , destroying it . Shahrbaraz only barely escaped , naked and alone , having lost his harem , baggage , and men . 
 Heraclius spent the rest of winter to the north of Lake Van . In 625 , his forces attempted to push back towards the Euphrates . In a mere seven days , he bypassed Mount Ararat and the 200 miles along the <unk> River to capture Amida and Martyropolis , important fortresses on the upper Tigris . Heraclius then carried on towards the Euphrates , pursued by Shahrbaraz . According to Arab sources , he was stopped at the <unk> or Batman Su River and defeated ; Byzantine sources , however , do not mention this incident . Another minor skirmish between Heraclius and Shahrbaraz took place at the Sarus river near Adana . Shahrbaraz stationed his forces across the river from the Byzantines . A bridge spanned the river , and the Byzantines immediately charged across . Shahrbaraz feigned retreat to lead the Byzantines into an ambush , and the vanguard of Heraclius ' army was destroyed within minutes . The Sasanians , however , had neglected to cover the bridge , and Heraclius charged across with the rearguard , unafraid of the arrows that the Sasanians fired , turning the tide of battle against the Sasanians . Shahrbaraz expressed his admiration at Heraclius to a renegade Greek : " See your Emperor ! He fears these arrows and spears no more than would an anvil ! " The Battle of Sarus was a successful retreat for the Byzantines that panegyrists magnified . In the aftermath of the battle , the Byzantine army wintered at Trebizond . 
 = = = Siege of Constantinople = = = 
 Shahrbaraz , along with a smaller army , later managed to slip through Heraclius ' flanks and bee @-@ lined for Chalcedon , the Sasanian base across the Bosphorus from Constantinople . Khosrau II coordinated with the Khagan of the Avars so as to launch a coordinated attack on Constantinople from both European and Asiatic sides . The army of Shahrbaraz stationed themselves at Chalcedon , while the Avars placed themselves on the European side of Constantinople and destroyed the Aqueduct of Valens . Because of the Byzantine navy 's control of the Bosphorus strait , however , the Sasanians could not send troops to the European side to aid their ally . This reduced the effectiveness of the siege , because the Sasanians were experts in siege warfare . Furthermore , the Sasanians and Avars had difficulties communicating across the guarded Bosphorus — though undoubtedly , there was some communication between the two forces . 
 On 7 August , a fleet of Sasanian rafts ferrying troops across the Bosphorus was surrounded and destroyed by Byzantine ships . The Slavs under the Avars attempted to attack the sea walls from across the Golden Horn , while the main Avar host attacked the land walls . Patrician Bonus ' galleys rammed and destroyed the Slavic boats ; the Avar land assault from 6 to 7 August also failed . With the news that Theodore had decisively triumphed over Shahin ( supposedly leading Shahin to die from depression ) , the Avars retreated to the Balkan hinterland within two days , never to threaten Constantinople seriously again . Even though the army of Shahrbaraz was still encamped at Chalcedon , the threat to Constantinople was over . 
 Disappointed by Shahrbaraz 's failure , Khosrau II sent a messenger bearing a letter to Kardarigan , who was the second @-@ in @-@ command of the Sasanian army . The letter said that Kardarigan should kill Shahrbaraz and take his army back to Ctesiphon , but the bearers of the letter were intercepted in Galatia by Byzantine soldiers , who gave the letter to Constantine III who in turn gave it to Heraclius . After reading the letter , he offered to show the letter to Shahrbaraz in a meeting at Constantinople . Shahrbaraz accepted his proposal and met Heraclius at Constantinople , where he read the letter and switched over to Heraclius ' side . Shahrbaraz then changed the contents of the letter , making it state that Khosrau II wanted 400 officers killed , ensuring that Kardarigan and the rest of the army remained loyal to him . 
 Shahrbaraz then moved his army to northern Syria , where he could easily decide to support either Khosrau or Heraclius at a moment 's notice . Still , with the neutralization of Khosrau 's most skilled general , Heraclius deprived his enemy of some of his best and most experienced troops , while securing his flanks prior to his invasion of Iran . 
 = = Overthrow of Khosrau II = = 
 In 627 , Khosrau sent Shahrbaraz a letter , which said that he should send his army to Ctesiphon . Shahrbaraz , however , disobeyed , and moved to <unk> , where he set up a camp in Ardashir <unk> . Khosrau then sent Farrukhzad to negotiate with him . However , Farrukhzad made a secret conspiracy against Khosrau and joined Shahrbaraz . 
 One year later , the feudal families of the Sasanian Empire , who were tired of war against the Byzantines and Khosrau 's oppressive policies , freed Khosrau 's son Kavadh , who had been imprisoned by his own father . The feudal families included : Shahrbaraz himself , who represented the Mihran family ; the House of <unk> represented by spahbed Farrukh Hormizd and his two sons Rostam Farrokhzad and Farrukhzad ; the Armenian faction represented by <unk> II Bagratuni ; and finally the <unk> . In February , Kavadh , along with <unk> <unk> , captured Ctesiphon and imprisoned Khosrau II . Kavadh II then proclaimed himself as king of the Sasanian Empire on 25 February , and with the aid of Piruz Khosrow , executed all his brothers and half @-@ brothers , including Khosrau II 's favorite son <unk> . Three days later , he ordered Mihr Hormozd to execute his father . With the agreement of the nobles of the Sasanian empire , Kavadh then made peace with the Byzantine emperor Heraclius , which made the Byzantines regain all their lost territories , their captured soldiers , a war indemnity , along with the True Cross and other relics that were lost in Jerusalem in 614 . 
 Following the loss of territory required for the peace treaty , the embittered aristocracy started forming independent states within the Sasanian Empire . This divided the resources of the country . Furthermore , dams and canals became derelict , and a devastating plague erupted in the western provinces of Iran , killing half of the population along with Kavadh II , who was succeeded by Ardashir III . 
 = = <unk> the throne = = 
 After the death of Kavadh II , Heraclius sent Shahrbaraz a letter saying : 
 On 27 April 629 ( or 630 ) Shahrbaraz besieged Ctesiphon with a force of 6 @,@ 000 men . He was , however , unable to capture the city , and then made an alliance with Piruz Khosrow , the leader of the <unk> ( Persian ) faction , and the previous minister of the Empire during the reign of Ardashir 's father , Kavadh II . He also made an alliance with <unk> Jushnas , who had succeeded him as the spahbed of <unk> in 626 . Shahrbaraz , with the aid of these two powerful figures , captured Ctesiphon , and executed Ardashir III along with many Sasanian nobles , including Ardashir 's minister Mah @-@ <unk> <unk> . Shahrbaraz then became the new shah ( king ) of the Sasanian Empire , and killed Kardarigan , who opposed Shahrbaraz after his usurpation of the Sasanian throne . 
 Heraclius also acknowledged Shahrbaraz 's Christian son Niketas , as his heir . An Iranian Christian as the heir of the Sasanian Empire opened the chances of the Christianization of Iran . After some time , Shahrbaraz had <unk> , the son of the former financial minister <unk> , crucified on a church in <unk> . The reason of this execution was reportedly because the latter had insulted Shahrbaraz during the reign of Khosrau II . Forty days later , 9 June 630 , during a ceremony , Shahrbaraz was killed by a spear thrown by Farrukh Hormizd , who then helped <unk> , the daughter of Khosrau II , to ascend the throne . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Shahrbaraz had played an important role in the Byzantine – Sasanian War of 602 – 628 , and the events that occurred after the war ; his mutiny against Khosrau II resulted in a Byzantine Pyrrhic victory and caused the Sasanian Empire to fall into a civil war . After the death of Shahrbaraz , his son Shapur @-@ i Shahrvaraz deposed <unk> and became king of the Sasanian Empire . His reign , however , did not last long , and he was shortly deposed by the Sasanian nobles . During the same period , Niketas entered in the service of the Byzantines , and would later appear as one of the Byzantine generals at the Battle of Yarmouk during the Arab – Byzantine wars . 
 = Honey ( Moby song ) = 
 " Honey " is a song by American electronica musician Moby . It was released as the first single from his fifth studio album Play on August 31 , 1998 . The uptempo song incorporates vocal samples from " Sometimes " by American blues singer Bessie Jones , while its instrumentation is built around a repeating piano riff . Moby discovered the " Sometimes " sample while listening to albums of folk music recordings compiled by field collector Alan Lomax . He subsequently composed " Honey " , along with several other songs from Play , using the Lomax recordings . 
 " Honey " was generally well received by music critics , who praised the song 's sampling of " Sometimes " and cited it as a highlight of Play . Upon release , it peaked at number thirty @-@ three on the UK Singles Chart and also charted in several other countries , including Austria and Germany . The song 's music video , directed by Roman Coppola , depicts three duplicates of Moby venturing through various locations . " Honey " was later remixed to feature vocals from American R & B singer Kelis . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Moby composed " Honey " for his fifth studio album Play after listening to a box set of folk music songs compiled by field collector Alan Lomax . He developed an interest in the acapella songs recorded by Lomax and subsequently wrote " Honey " in " about 10 minutes . " Lomax recordings were also used as the basis for several other songs from Play , including " Find My Baby " and " Natural Blues " . After producing " Honey " , Moby commissioned Brazilian record producer Mario Caldato , Jr. to carry out its mixing process ; he had heard of Caldato from his work on American hip hop group Beastie Boys ' 1998 album Hello Nasty , and later recounted : 
 I was hanging out at Max Fish and Mars Bar and Motor City drinking with the few remaining people in New York who would still hang out with me . At this time the <unk> had Hello Nasty , which was doing incredibly well , and I just couldn 't believe that Mario Caldato , Jr. was willing to work with me . 
 " Honey " features a piano @-@ driven beat and additional instrumentation performed by Moby himself , including original slide guitar parts . The song is built around samples of American blues singer Bessie Jones ' 1960 song " Sometimes " , from the Alan Lomax compilation Sounds of the South . The samples consist of several lines performed by Jones , each followed by a choir responding " sometime " – the lines are repeated , harmonized and orchestrated in different ways throughout the course of the song . Moby has said that the vocals are meant to " convey female sex . " Other musical elements incorporated in " Honey " include hand claps , vinyl record scratches and synthesized strings . John Bush of AllMusic notes the song 's mixture of sampled blues music with " breakbeat techno . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Honey " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Frank Owen of The Village Voice called the song a " mesmerizing floor @-@ filler , arousing memories of Hamilton Bohannon 's hypnotic ' 70s metronome funk . " Alexandra Marshall of MTV wrote that its samples of " Sometimes " " work both as ingredients in a sonic collage and stay totally recognizable at the same time " . A writer for The Guardian praised " Honey " as " joyous , hypnotic , romping blues " , while reviews from NME described the song as a " sparkling diamond " and a " natural born dancefloor groove " . In his book I Hear America Singing : An Introduction to Popular Music , author David <unk> notes that " Honey " was often singled out in reviews of Play for special praise . Jim Sullivan of The Boston Globe cited " Honey " as a highlight song from Play , while Gene Stout of Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer called it " one of the album 's most riveting tracks . " The song ranked at number twenty @-@ four on The Village Voice 's annual Pazz & Jop critics ' poll . On their year @-@ end list , Spin named " Honey " the tenth best single of 1999 . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Honey " was released as the lead single from Play on August 10 , 1998 in the United Kingdom , months prior to the release of the album . Several remixes of the song were produced by various artists , including Rollo Armstrong , Sister Bliss , <unk> , <unk> Jey , Mickey Finn and Moby himself . Instead of selecting remixes for inclusion on issues of the " Honey " physical single , Moby and his label Mute Records ultimately opted to release all of them commercially . " Honey " was released in several other European countries the following month – several radio stations refused to play the song , however , with Moby later saying : 
 The song " Honey " was a single we put out in Europe in September , and a lot of radio stations wouldn 't play it because they said it was an instrumental dance track . I listen to it and all I hear is singing . Are they talking about the same song ? 
 Despite decreased European radio support , " Honey " managed to chart in several countries within the continent . The song debuted and peaked at number 33 on the UK Singles Chart for the issue dated September 5 , 1998 . It achieved its highest chart placement in Austria , where it peaked at number 30 , and also charted in Germany and the Netherlands . Outside of Europe , " Honey " peaked at number 49 on the United States Billboard Dance / Electronic Singles Sales chart in conjunction with the single " Run On " and at number 56 in Australia . Moby later collaborated with American R & B singer Kelis for a remix of " Honey " on which she provided additional vocals . Additional production and remixing was provided by <unk> . The remix was released as a dual single with " Why Does My Heart Feel So Bad ? " on October 16 , 2000 and peaked at number 17 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Honey " was directed by Roman Coppola . It opens with a wooden box falling from the sky – upon hitting the ground , three clones of Moby dressed in suits emerge and make their way towards a city . One spots a car and walks toward it , but accidentally drops a map in his possession . Crawling underneath the car to retrieve it , the Moby clone soon finds himself in a bathing woman 's apartment room – he manages to obtain the map and exit the room before the woman discovers his presence . He enters another room , followed by his duplicates , and jumps out the window . 
 The other two clones are then seen in a forest – one walks behind a tree and reappears dressed in casual attire . He climbs another tree and ends up in the bathroom of the woman 's apartment , where he retrieves a package . The clone then crawls underneath her bed and finds himself underneath a car . He opens the package and finds a gasoline can , which he pours into a compartment located behind the car 's license plate . All three clones enter the car and drive to the box , which they step back into ; the video concludes with the box 's explosion . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Gail Godwin = 
 Gail Godwin ( born June 18 , 1937 ) is an American novelist and short story writer . Godwin has written 14 novels , two short story collections , three non @-@ fiction books , and ten libretti . Her primary literary accomplishments are her novels , which have included five best @-@ sellers and three finalists for the National Book Award . Most of her books are realistic fiction novels that follow a character 's psychological and intellectual development , often based on themes taken from Godwin 's own life . 
 Godwin was born in Birmingham , Alabama , but raised mostly in Asheville , North Carolina by her mother and grandmother . She adopted her mother 's interest in writing at an early age and obtained a Bachelor 's degree in journalism from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill ( UNC ) . After graduating , she worked briefly as a reporter for The Miami Herald , then traveled to Europe and worked for the U.S. Travel Service run by the U.S. Embassy in London . She returned to the U.S. after six years . Godwin taught English at the University of Iowa , while earning her M.A. ( 1968 ) and PhD ( 1971 ) in English Literature . 
 While at the University of Iowa , Godwin 's dissertation became her first novel , The Perfectionists . By 1976 she had become a successful writer and author of three books . In particular , two books written by her in the 1980s , A Mother and Two Daughters ( 1982 ) and A Southern Family ( 1987 ) , resulted in further acclaim and expanded the readership of her books . Following The Finishing School ( 1984 ) , readership of her books dramatically declined until 2006 , when Queen of the Underworld was published . Flora ( 2013 ) became one of her more commercially successful novels . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Gail Godwin was born on June 18 , 1937 in Birmingham , Alabama . Her parents , Kathleen <unk> and Mose Winston Godwin , were both from North Carolina , but visiting cousins in Alabama when Godwin was born . Godwin 's parents divorced two years later . After the breakup , Gail and her mother moved in with her grandparents in Durham , North Carolina . They moved again to Weaverville , NC and then to Asheville , NC . Her grandfather died in 1939 , so Godwin was raised by her mother and grandmother in Asheville , where they lived until 1948 . 
 Godwin 's grandmother filled the traditional role of a mother , cleaning , cooking and sewing , while her mother was the breadwinner . Godwin 's mother had a Bachelor 's and master 's degree from University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill . She taught college @-@ level English in the mornings , and worked as a reporter for a local paper , Asheville Citizen @-@ Times , in the evenings . On the weekends she wrote love stories for magazines in New York . According to Godwin , growing up with two female guardians had an influence on her writing and her decision to become a writer . By age five she had started identifying with her mother 's occupation as a writer more so than her grandmother 's work . At nine years old Godwin wrote her first story , titled " Ollie <unk> " . 
 In 1948 Kathleen married Frank Cole , a World War II veteran , and moved the family to Virginia . Godwin was further inspired by her mother 's determination to continue writing after having a second child . According to Godwin , much of her time growing up was spent in the newsroom , where her mother worked . She also witnessed her mother 's plays and novels being rejected . Godwin 's autobiography creates the impression that much of her own writing was intended to accomplish the things her mother could not . As Cole 's salary increased and he was able to support the family , Godwin 's mother focused on being a wife and homemaker , eventually not writing at all . 
 In Godwin 's late teens , her stepfather was working as a salesman and the family moved often . Godwin attended several different high schools , including an all @-@ girls Catholic school , St. Genevieve @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Pines . It was Godwin 's favorite teacher at St. Genevieve @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Pines who persuaded her to start keeping a personal diary . According to Godwin , she had a " church upbringing or convent school training . " She attended church at St. Mary 's and All Souls . She also wrote a short novel as a teenager . 
 Godwin had no relationship with her father , until the two re @-@ connected at her high school graduation . Godwin 's father then offered to pay for her college education . During her junior year in college , Godwin moved in with her father , who committed suicide later that year . Godwin 's uncle and a half brother later committed suicide as well . Her mother died in a car accident in 1989 . 
 Godwin attended Peace College in Raleigh , North Carolina from 1955 to 1957 . She then transferred to University of North Carolina ( UNC ) , where she attended from 1957 to 1959 , graduating with a bachelor 's degree in journalism . While in college she worked on The Otherwise Virgins , a novel her mother had written , but was unable to find a publisher for . In 1959 Knopf sent an agent to UNC to scout young writers . Godwin submitted a portion of her novel Windy Peaks for their consideration . The story was about the staff and guests at a resort hotel in the mountains . Her manuscript was rejected . Godwin also worked as a waitress at <unk> Manor at Blowing Rock , North Carolina during her sophomore and junior years . 
 = = Early work = = 
 Godwin 's first job out of college was at The Miami Herald , where she worked as a journalist for one year . There she met and briefly married photographer and co @-@ worker , Douglas Kennedy . They were married in 1960 and divorced several months later in 1961 . According to Godwin , she " worked very hard " , but her stories were too " flamboyant " for the publication and she was fired . According to Contemporary Literary Criticism , she was incorporating too much human interest into the paper 's stories , which were supposed to be factual . After briefly living with her mother again , Godwin moved to London to distance herself from a failed marriage and job . 
 In London Godwin worked for the U.S. Travel Service run by the American embassy from 1961 to 1965 . Godwin said she was a " glorified receptionist , " who was able to read books in secret while at work . Her cousin , who was the mayor of Weaverville , North Carolina , helped to get her the job . While she was employed by the embassy , Godwin completed a novel entitled Gull Key . Like many of her early works , the book focuses on a female character figuring out if marriage and being a parent is the life she wants for herself . Several publishers rejected the novel and the manuscript was lost when Godwin sent the only copy to a publisher that went out of business without returning it . 
 While in England , Godwin took a course in creative writing at the City Literature Institute , where she met her second husband , psychiatrist Ian Marshall . They were married two months later . The marriage was brief and they were divorced in 1966 . After their breakup , Godwin returned to the United States . At age 29 , she took a job as fact @-@ checker in New York City for The Saturday Evening Post . She said the job was embarrassing , because she wanted to be a writer , as opposed to fact @-@ checking the work of others . 
 At this point , a distant uncle of Godwin 's died , leaving her an inheritance of $ 5 @,@ 000 . She used the money to apply to the Iowa Writers Workshop and , after being accepted , to move from New York to Iowa City in 1967 . There Godwin met her teacher and future mentor Kurt Vonnegut . At Iowa , Godwin worked as an instructor while earning an M.A. and Ph.D. from the same university in 1968 and 1971 respectively . She began teaching Greek Drama , before earning a position teaching literature . By age 30 , Godwin had written three novels , but was unable to get any of them published . 
 = = Author = = 
 = = = Early published work = = = 
 According to The Asheville Citizen @-@ Times , Godwin 's first successful work was a 1969 short story in Cosmopolitan . Her first published novel was her dissertation written as graduate work at University of Iowa . It was published in 1970 and called The Perfectionists . The story was based loosely on Godwin 's second marriage . It was accepted by Harper & Row in December 1968 , while Godwin completing her graduate work . From 1971 on , Godwin earned a living through her work as a writer and augmented her income by means of intermittent teaching positions . 
 After completing her graduate work in 1971 , Godwin spent two months at the <unk> artist 's colony in Upstate New York in 1972 . There she wrote 100 pages of a novel called The Villain , which was never published . The work was scrapped , but ended up being part of the basis for The Odd Woman . According to author Jane Hill , it was while working on The Odd Women that Godwin transitioned from linear narratives to more complex structures where the plot interweaves past and present events . 
 It was at <unk> that Godwin met composer Robert Starer and began a life partnership with him that lasted until his death in 2001 . They moved to Stone Ridge , New York in 1973 and later built a house in Woodstock , New York , where Godwin continued her work from home . In addition to her books and short stories , Godwin wrote libretti for ten of Starer 's musical compositions . 
 = = = Height of Godwin 's career = = = 
 By 1976 Godwin was a successful writer and novelist who had published three books : The Perfectionists , Glass People , and The Odd Woman . The Odd Woman was the longest and most widely recognized of the three . Several short stories by Godwin were published in prominent magazines like Harper 's Esquire , Ms. and the Paris Review , where she was often featured on the cover . Godwin was awarded grants from the National Endowment for the Arts ( 1975 – 76 ) and the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation ( 1975 – 76 ) . 
 Throughout her career , Godwin worked consistently with her agent , John Hawkins , but worked with several different publishing houses . Godwin 's early books were published by Knopf . After the editor for The Perfectionists , David Segal , died suddenly of a heart attack , Robert Gottlieb from Knopf became her editor for her next four books . Godwin credits Gottlieb for much of the success of her early works . Later on , when Godwin 's then @-@ recent books were less widely read , USA Today commented that this could be in part because she was no longer working with Gottlieb . After Knopf , Godwin contracted with Viking , who offered larger advances and more publicity for her books . 
 During the years 1982 to 1991 , Godwin produced another collection of short fiction and four more novels . According to Publishers Weekly , it was A Mother and Two Daughters ( 1982 ) and A Southern Family ( 1987 ) that substantially expanded her readership . These novels remained on bestseller lists for an extended period of time . Godwin 's earlier works had sold an average of less than 8 @,@ 000 copies , while A Mother and Two Daughters sold more than 1 @.@ 5 million . It was the most popular of Godwin 's early works and the first time she had written a narrative from the point @-@ of @-@ view of multiple characters . In 1987 , Godwin was awarded the Janet <unk> Kafka Prize for her work on The Southern Family . 
 By the early 2000s , five of Godwin 's books had made the New York Times Bestsellers List and three were finalists for the National Book Award . 
 = = = Recent works = = = 
 By 1999 Godwin had published ten novels . In 2001 , Godwin 's partner , Robert Starer , died and she began writing a fictional story based on their life called Evenings at Five that was published two years later . In November 2004 Godwin signed a contract with the publisher Ballantine Books for her next four books . 
 According to Publishers Weekly , Godwin had " achieved a huge degree of success " and still had many devoted readers , but by 1999 she was " no longer the draw she once was . " By 2006 The Finishing School ( 1984 ) was her last major , commercially successful book , which was followed by a drop in readership . According to Godwin , she was " one of the many authors to be caught in the tumult while [ the publishing industry ] thrashed about in search of a new business model . " The Los Angeles Times said her characters that were progressive working women in the 1970s and 1980s , were now considered " tame " in a modern context . 
 Kirkus Reviews said Godwin had " a couple of subpar efforts , " until publishing Queen of the Underworld in 2006 . Flora ( 2013 ) became one of her better selling books . Godwin also authored an autobiography , Publishing that appeared in 2015 . The Los Angeles Times said her auto @-@ biography was a " preemptive strike " after she was approached by an independent biographer . As of 2015 , Godwin 's published works have included 14 novels , two collections of short stories , three non @-@ fiction works , and ten libretti . 
 = = = Academia and other work = = = 
 According to The Intellectual in Twentieth @-@ Century Southern Literature , Godwin was unusual in that she was a popular novelist that was also working in academia . Godwin taught at the University of Illinois Center for Advanced Studies from 1971 to 1972 . During her time as an author , she was also a lecturer at the Iowa Writers ' Workshop ( 1972 to 1973 ) , Vassar College ( 1977 ) , and Columbia University ( 1978 / 1981 ) . She acted as chair of the fiction panel for the National Book Awards in 1986 and 2008 . In 1989 , Godwin also founded a small publishing house called St. Hilda 's Press . It published religious texts not printed by more commercialized publishers . She later became a Distinguished Alumna of the University of North Carolina and the University of Iowa . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Most of Godwin 's works are based on themes or events taken from her own life . The characters , settings and narratives vary from novel @-@ to @-@ novel , but common topics have included family , the position of women in society and relationships , a woman 's artistic and career pursuits , and the role of religious faith . According to The Intellectual in Twentieth @-@ Century Southern Literature , Godwin 's characters " struggle intellectually to navigate the mazes of race , class , gender , family , faith and religion . " According to Contemporary Literary Criticism , " she writes about issues pertaining to women - male @-@ female roles , marriage , family , personal freedom , self @-@ concept , and self @-@ actualization . " Author Jane Hill said Godwin 's books are about co @-@ existing with authorities , the role of decision @-@ making in life , careers as an artist , and the consequences of thwarted ambition . Much of her emphasis is on the concept of the self and one 's struggles with society . 
 Most of the academic analysis of Godwin 's work focuses on challenges her characters have as women . According to Contemporary Fiction Writers of the South , a typical protagonist in Godwin 's novels is a young woman that " in search of herself , confronts obstacles caused by her family , her lovers , her husband , or her own <unk> as she struggles to establish her independence and secure her identity through her work . " The main character may be personally flawed , then achieve self @-@ reflection or personal growth thanks to the support of their community or a mentor . Main characters often make poor choices , but become a better person , learn to make better decisions and build stronger bonds often as a result of intellectual pursuits . According to critic Anne Cheney , the protagonist may be " searching for happiness , academic or artistic achievement , love , respect , or , more generally , meaning in life . " 
 According to Warren French from the University of Wales , Godwin 's works are most often seen as having two primary themes : gender roles and southern settings . French said Godwin herself disapproves of being categorized , which she feels creates " externally imposed limitations " on the themes she covers . However scholars continue to attempt to put her work into a distinctive literary category . In her early works Godwin was seen as a " woman " writer , because her books appealed to a mostly female audience and because she is a woman . After publishing A Southern Family she began being identified as a southern writer . According to The Times ( London ) , Godwin has a " pesky resistance to categorisation " and she often changes themes even after being commercially successful with one . Academic Lihong Xie said Godwin could be identified with the literary tradition of the Bildungsroman , which focuses on the moral and psychological development of a character . Many other critics posit that a quest for meaning and self @-@ identification are Godwin 's primary themes . 
 Other themes in Godwin 's work have included escaping the cultural expectations of becoming a " southern lady , " childhood abandonment , depression and suicide , racial discrimination , social class and succeeding without a male companion . Her work has spanned different literary categories , such as realism , fantasy and allegory . 
 = = = Early works = = = 
 All of Godwin 's books written from 1970 to 1990 are fictional stories based on themes taken from Godwin 's life . Her early works focus on women hoping for a relationship with a male companion , but at the same time wanting independence and freedom . The main protagonist is often restricted by family , tradition and patriarchy . Most of Godwin 's early works include a prominent mother @-@ daughter relationship as well . 
 Her first three books , The Perfectionists ( 1970 ) , Glass People ( 1972 ) and The Odd Woman ( 1974 ) , have protagonists who find that their relationship with a male companion restricts their personal and professional development . The first two books are each about a female character who feels trapped in an unhappy marriage . According to Contemporary Southern Writers , " unlike fairy tale romances , these novels present a realistic depiction of feminist concerns and struggles . " Lihong Xie comments that Godwin 's protagonists are southern women that " caught between the ideal of southern womanhood and contemporary feminism , struggle to form a personal identity ... " 
 Violet Clay ( 1978 ) and A Mother and Two Daughters ( 1982 ) are each about an unmarried protagonist 's career in a creative profession . In A Mother and Two Daughters the main character resists the temptation to get married and chooses instead to focus on her work . A Mother and Two Daughters and A Southern Family ( 1987 ) each depend heavily on a southern setting and employ themes traditionally associated with social problems in the South . Some of their themes include racial discrimination , social @-@ economic class and the cultural differences between generations . Many characters struggle to reduce the gap between the rich and poor or try to break free from a dominant cultural tradition , with mixed success . 
 In Godwin 's early books , the female protagonists tend to be fearful , passive and repeat their mistakes . The protagonist is often depicted as a victim who has failed to achieve independence and is struggling to form a personal identity that could exist beyond that of their relationship with a male companion . In her next books , Godwin begins to introduce stronger and more independent central characters . Violet Clay ( 1978 ) for example , features a more assertive character than those in prior novels . According to Susan S. Kissel Adams from Northern Kentucky University , Godwin 's later characters : 
 " come to value inclusion and connection over exclusion and isolation in their lives . They seek ways to combine their private and their public selves , open and extend family structures , take political action , and fulfill their social responsibilities ... In their struggle against southern codes and family structures that retain a powerful hold even in the late twentieth century . Godwin 's daughters of the South grow from a state of dependency and arrested development : they begin to embark on mature , adult lives of their own . " 
 = = = Later works = = = 
 As in her earlier novels , Godwin 's work in the 1970s and ' 80s still centers mostly on difficulties female characters experienced as women . However , she departs from this theme in The Finishing School ( 1984 ) , which is about two women of different generations and the student @-@ mentor relationship between them , rather than their relationship with men . According to Lihong Xie , Godwin 's work during this period continues to be about " the female self " and a woman 's intimate relationships with husbands , fathers and God . 
 Godwin 's books begin to incorporate religious themes starting with Father Melancholy 's Daughter ( 1991 ) . The novel is told from the perspective of multiple characters , each of whom have a different perspective on religion . Father Melancholy 's Daughter was followed by several books that centered on the Episcopal church and Christian practices . In these novels female and male characters have a more equal influence on the events and plot than in prior novels . Godwin 's books neither evangelize nor mock the practices of the Episcopal Church , but rather treat it as a routine aspect of life , or as a subject of intellectual interest . During these years Godwin 's books continued to show father figures who have died or are absent . By 1996 two of her books had fathers that died and five had stepfathers that are depicted as intruding on the mother @-@ daughter relationship . 
 According to Narrative Magazine , Godwin transitions from female protagonists who are " looking for ways to get out of traps and confinements " to those who make " interesting or dangerous life choices . " Some of Godwin 's later works depict successful , but unconventional marriages . In The Good Husband ( 1994 ) both partners accept the wife 's career as having a priority over the husband 's . The Good Husband is also a return to the theme of marriage that is typical of some of Godwin 's earlier works . According to Contemporary Southern Writers , The Good Husband " explores the dying experience . " Godwin also published several non @-@ fiction works based on her own life during this period . 
 Godwin 's short story collections Dream Children and Mr. Bedford and the Muses focus on themes similar to those in her novels , but also incorporate dreams and myth . They tend to be less auto @-@ biographical than her novels . According to philosopher Anna @-@ Teresa <unk> , Godwin 's approach to dream @-@ worlds is radical , because the dream is incorporated into the characters ' real @-@ world experiences . Her characters compare their real and dream worlds to each other in order to " negotiate their sense of destiny . " She said Dream Children challenges the distinction between reality and dream experiences , where the dream does not " violate one 's theory of reality . " 
 USA Today said that the subjects covered in Unfinished Desires ( 2010 ) include " Mean girls . Lesbian kisses . Learning disabilities . Domestic violence . Alcoholism . [ and ] Roman Catholic nuns . " According to The Times ( London ) , Flora ( 2013 ) " encompasses most of the themes that have preoccupied [ Godwin ] throughout her career . " It takes place in the South in the mid @-@ 1940s in the mountains , where a widowed schoolmaster raises his ten @-@ year @-@ old daughter . In a 2015 interview , Godwin says that her work has become less " angry " . She said her early works showed a frustration with not being heard , and that her later books focuses on her enemies . Now she 's working to understand " the villains ' villains . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 By 1980 Godwin 's writing had become the subject of essays , book chapters and other literary analysis from academic critics . According to The Washington Post , " Gail Godwin has been accused of not being able to decide whether she 's a popular or a literary writer , but she 's certainly accrued enough bestsellers and literary honors to claim both identities . " Much of the scholarly attention on her works comes from those critics with an interest in southern or feminist authors . According to Contemporary Fiction Writers of the South , Godwin 's books have been " widely and favorably reviewed " . Contemporary American Women Fiction Writers states that " although some reviews of her work have been mixed ... her books are accomplished works of fiction , if not masterpieces . " 
 Contemporary Literary Criticism said " most of her books are characterized as well @-@ written , well executed , readable , witty , and having vivid , believable characters . Godwin is typically praised for having convincing plots , witty , intelligent characters and that she has strong narrative skill . She has been criticized , in particular in response to The Good Husband , for excessive symbolism . According to the Dictionary of Literary Biography , Godwin is " thoughtful and philosophical " , but she is often critiqued for authoring fiction that is so closely representative of her own life . 
 The Odd Woman , The Finishing School and Southern Family received overall positive reviews , while Violet Clay and The Good Husband received more negative reviews . According to The Boston Globe , Flora was one of Godwin 's best books . 
 = = List of works = = 
 This list of works has been taken mostly from Gail Godwin 's entry in the Dictionary of Literary Biography . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gail Godwin lives in a large house in the mountains in Woodstock , New York . She does most of her writing in her study at home . As of 1999 , she was swimming every day . She has a southern accent . Godwin is an Episcopalian . 
 = Kidnapping of Jaycee Dugard = 
 The kidnapping of Jaycee Dugard occurred on June 10 , 1991 , south of South Lake Tahoe , California . Dugard was 11 years old at the time and was abducted from a street while she was walking from home to a school bus stop . Searches began immediately after her disappearance , but no reliable leads were generated despite the fact that her stepfather , Carl Probyn , witnessed her kidnapping and chased the kidnappers on his mountain bike . Dugard remained missing until 2009 , when a convicted sex offender , Phillip Garrido , visited the University of California campus in Berkeley accompanied by two young girls on August 24 and 25 that same year . The unusual behavior of the trio sparked an investigation that led Phillip 's parole officer to order him to bring the two girls to a parole office in Concord , California , on August 26 . He was accompanied by a woman who was successfully identified as Jaycee Dugard who was by then 29 years old . 
 Phillip , 58 , and his wife Nancy Garrido , 54 , of Antioch , were arrested by police for kidnapping , imprisonment and other charges . On April 28 , 2011 , they pleaded guilty to Dugard 's kidnapping and sexual assault . Law enforcement officers believe Dugard was kept in concealed tents , sheds and lean @-@ tos in an area behind the Garridos ' house in Antioch for almost 18 years . During this time , Dugard bore two daughters who were ages 11 and 15 at the time of her reappearance . On June 2 , 2011 , Phillip was sentenced to 431 years to life imprisonment ; his wife , Nancy , received 36 years to life . Phillip is a person of interest in at least one other San Francisco Bay Area missing person case . 
 In 1979 , Dugard 's biological father Ken Slayton had a fling with Jaycee 's mother Terry Dugard that resulted in a pregnancy that he was unaware of and had never met Jaycee ; upon her resurfacing , Slayton wanted to be let into her life . Dugard decided not to allow that to happen . In 2010 , the State of California awarded the Dugard family US $ 20 million . In 2011 , despite having a fifth grade education , Jaycee wrote a best @-@ selling book on her experiences titled A Stolen Life . According to interviews , she remains single , focusing on herself , her children , and her family . Her exact whereabouts are unknown . 
 = = Background of kidnappers = = 
 The primary arrestee in the case , Phillip Greg Garrido , was born in Contra Costa County , California , on April 5 , 1951 . He grew up in Brentwood , where he graduated from Liberty High School in 1969 . In 1972 , Phillip was arrested and charged with sexually assaulting a 14 @-@ year @-@ old girl , but the case did not go to trial after the girl declined to testify . 
 In 1973 , Phillip married high school classmate Christine Murphy , who said Phillip was abusive . Murphy alleged that Phillip kidnapped her when she tried to leave him . 
 In 1976 , Phillip kidnapped 25 @-@ year @-@ old Katherine Callaway in South Lake Tahoe , California . He took her to a Reno , Nevada warehouse , where he raped her for five and a half hours . When a police officer noticed a car parked outside the unit and then the broken lock on the warehouse door , he knocked on the door and was greeted by Phillip . Callaway then emerged and asked for help . Phillip was promptly arrested . He was charged and convicted of crimes in both federal and state courts . In a 1976 court @-@ ordered psychiatric evaluation , Phillip was diagnosed as a " sexual deviant and chronic drug abuser . " The psychiatrist recommended that a neurological examination be conducted because Phillip 's chronic drug use could be " responsible in part " for his " mixed " or " multiple " sexual deviation . Phillip was then evaluated by a neurologist . The diagnostic impression was : " normal neurological examination . " In court , Phillip testified that he masturbated in his car by the side of grammar and high schools while watching girls . He was convicted on March 9 , 1977 and began serving a 50 @-@ year federal sentence on June 30 , 1977 , at Leavenworth Penitentiary in Kansas . 
 At Leavenworth , Phillip met Nancy Bocanegra – the secondary arrestee in Dugard 's kidnapping – who was visiting another prisoner , her uncle . On October 5 , 1981 , Phillip and Bocanegra were married at Leavenworth . On January 22 , 1988 , Phillip was released from Leavenworth to Nevada State Prison , where he served seven months of a five @-@ years @-@ to @-@ life Nevada sentence . He was transferred to federal parole authorities in Contra Costa on August 26 , 1988 . In Antioch , the Garridos lived in the home of his elderly mother , who suffered from dementia . As a parolee , he was monitored , later wore a GPS @-@ enabled ankle bracelet , and was visited many times by parole officers , local sheriff 's deputies , and federal agents . 
 In 2009 , his father , Manuel Garrido , who resided in Brentwood , said his son was a " good boy " as a child but changed radically after a serious motorcycle accident as a teenager – Phillip later turned to drug use – primarily crystal meth and LSD . Phillip 's brother Ron ( born 1944 ) who lives in Brentwood said Phillip became a " fruitcake " after getting hooked on hallucinogenic and stimulant street drugs . Manuel died in Brentwood in 2011 at the age of 90 . 
 = = Abduction = = 
 In September 1990 , Dugard and her family moved from the Los Angeles County city of Arcadia , to Meyers a rural town south of South Lake Tahoe , California , because they thought it was a safer community . At the time of the abduction , Dugard was in the fifth grade and , because of her shyness , was worrying about an upcoming field trip . She was close to her mother , Terry Probyn , and her infant half sister Shayna who was born in 1991 . Her biological father , Ken Slayton , had left the family before she was born . Although her mother had remarried to a man named Carl Probyn , Dugard was never close to her stepfather . On June 10 , 1991 , Dugard 's mother , who worked as a typesetter at a print house , left for work early in the day . Dugard , wearing her favorite all @-@ pink outfit , walked up the hill from her house , against traffic , to catch the school bus . When she was halfway up the hill , a car approached her . She thought that the man in the car would ask for directions . When he rolled down the window , he shocked her unconscious with a stun gun and abducted her . The man was Phillip . Nancy , who the District Attorney in the Dugard case believes scouted Dugard as a prize for Phillip , held Dugard down in the car as she drifted in and out of consciousness during the three hour drive from her home to the Garrido home in Antioch . The only time Dugard spoke was when she pleaded that her parents could not afford a ransom . 
 Carl Probyn witnessed the abduction of his stepdaughter from within sight of their home . He saw two people in a mid @-@ sized gray car – possibly a Mercury Monarch – make a U @-@ turn at the school bus stop where Dugard was waiting , and a woman forcing Dugard into the car . Probyn gave chase on a bicycle , but was unable to overtake the vehicle . Some of Dugard 's classmates were also witnesses to the abduction . Initial suspects included Probyn and Slayton , though they did not know each other and Slayton had only had a brief relationship with Terry in 1979 , not knowing he had a child . When Dugard was rescued , Slayton expressed an interest in meeting his daughter and taking a paternity test . Dugard refused . Probyn took and passed several polygraph tests , and Slayton was also quickly cleared of suspicion . 
 By the time the Garridos arrived at their home in an unincorporated area in Contra Costa County , they had removed Dugard 's clothing , leaving only a butterfly @-@ shaped ring that she hid from them for the next 18 years . Taking her from their car onto their property , Phillip placed a blanket over Dugard 's head and ushered her into an area of his backyard where sheds and storage units stood , placing her inside a tiny one that was soundproofed . After he finished raping her for the first time he left her naked in the structure , which he bolted shut , warning her that Doberman Pinschers were outside and trained to attack her if she tried to escape . Phillip would visit her in the structure , bringing her food and milkshakes , and talking to her . 
 = = Search effort = = 
 Within hours of Dugard 's disappearance , local and national media converged on South Lake Tahoe to cover the story . Within days , dozens of local volunteers assisted in the search effort , which involved nearly every resource within the community . Within weeks , tens of thousands of fliers and posters were mailed to businesses throughout the United States . Since her favorite color was pink , the town was blanketed in pink ribbons as a constant reminder of her disappearance , and as a demonstration of support for her family by the community . 
 Terry Probyn founded a group called Jaycee 's Hope , which directed the volunteer and fundraising efforts . Cassette tapes of the song " Jaycee Lee " along with T @-@ shirts , sweatshirts , and buttons were sold to raise money for poster materials , postage , printing , and related expenses . Child Quest International and the National Center for Missing & Exploited Children were involved in the effort . A reward was offered , which was noted on the posters and fliers . The kidnapping case attracted nationwide attention and was featured on the June 14 , 1991 episode of the television show America 's Most Wanted . 
 The ensuing months and years were a continuous effort of child safety awareness , fundraising events , and candlelight vigils marking Dugard 's disappearance keeping her story before the public . 
 = = Captivity = = 
 Immediately after he kidnapped her , Phillip forced Dugard into a shower with him . The first time he raped her , she was still in handcuffs , which she wore during her first week in captivity . During that period , Dugard 's only human contact was Phillip , who sometimes brought her fast food and told her amusing stories . He provided a bucket for her to use to relieve herself . At one point , he provided her with a television , but she could not watch the news and was unaware of the publicized search for her . Almost a month and a half after her kidnapping , by Dugard 's recollection , Phillip moved her to a larger room next door , where she was handcuffed to a bed . He explained that the " demon angels " let him take her and that she would help him with his sexual problems because society had ignored him . Phillip went on methamphetamine binges he called " runs " , during which he would dress Dugard up and spend time with her cutting out figures from pornographic magazines . He made her listen for the voices he said he could hear from the walls . Phillip also often professed the belief that he was a chosen servant of God . These binges would end with Phillip sobbing and apologizing to Dugard alternating with threats to sell her to people who would put her in a cage . 
 Seven months into her captivity , Phillip introduced Dugard to his wife , Nancy , who brought the child a stuffed animal and chocolate milk , and engaged in the same tearful apologies to her . Though Dugard craved the woman 's approval at the time , in retrospect she has stated that she was manipulated by Nancy , who alternated between motherly concern and coldness and cruelty , expressing her jealousy of Dugard , whom she regarded as the one to blame for her predicament . Dugard characterized Nancy , who worked as a nursing home aide , as " evil " and " twisted . " When Phillip was returned to prison for failing a drug test , Nancy replaced her husband as Dugard 's jailer . The Garridos manipulated Dugard further by presenting her , on two occasions , with kittens that would later " mysteriously vanish . " When they discovered that she was signing her real name in a journal that she kept on the kittens , she was forced to tear out the page with her name on it , the last time she would be permitted to say or write her name until years later . She was never allowed to see a doctor or dentist . 
 = = = Pregnancy and children = = = 
 Thirty @-@ four months into her captivity , the Garridos began to allow Dugard freedom from her handcuffs for periods of time , though they kept her locked in the bolted room . On April 3 , 1994 , Easter Sunday , they gave her cooked food for the first time . They informed her that they believed that she was pregnant . Age 13 and four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months pregnant , Dugard had learned of the link between sex and pregnancy from television . At this time , while raising her baby Shayna , Terry Probyn was holding rummage sales to pay for private investigators and distributing a million flyers across the United States featuring a sketch artist 's image of a teenage Dugard . Dugard watched programs on childbirth , in preparation for the birth of her first daughter , which occurred on August 18 , 1994 . Her second daughter was born on November 13 , 1997 . Dugard took care of her daughters using information learned from television , working to protect them from Phillip , who continued his enraged rants and lectures . 
 Neighbor Patrick McQuaid said that he recalls , as a child , meeting Dugard through a fence in the Garridos ' yard soon after the kidnapping . He said that she had identified herself by the name " Jaycee " and that when he asked her if she lived there or was just visiting , she answered that she lived there . At that point , Phillip came out and took her back indoors . Phillip eventually built an eight @-@ foot @-@ tall fence around the backyard and set up a tent for Dugard , the first time that she was allowed to walk outside since her kidnapping . She coped with her continued captivity by planting flowers in a garden and home @-@ schooling her daughters . At one point , Phillip informed Dugard that to pacify his wife , she and her daughters were to address Nancy as their mother , and that she was to teach her daughters that she was their older sister . When Dugard and her daughters were eventually allowed to come into contact with other people , they continued this fiction . 
 Phillip operated a print shop where Dugard acted as the graphic artist . Ben Daughdrill , a customer of Phillip 's printing business , claimed that he met and spoke by telephone with Dugard and that she did excellent work . During this time , Dugard had access to the business phone and an email account . Another customer indicated that she never hinted to him about her childhood abduction or her true identity . 
 Phillip kept a blog associated with what he called " God 's Desire Church . " In the blog , Phillip said that he had the power to control sound with his mind . Phillip asked several people , including customers , to sign testimonials confirming that they witnessed his ability to " control sound with my mind " and a device he developed " for others to witness this phenomena [ sic ] . " 
 Law enforcement officers believe that when they became involved in 2009 , Dugard 's living quarters were in a secondary backyard behind Phillip 's house . The private area of the yard included sheds ( one of which was soundproofed and used as a recording studio in which Phillip recorded himself singing religious @-@ themed and romantic country songs ) , two homemade tents , and what has been described as a camping @-@ style shower and toilet . The area was surrounded by tall trees and a 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 @-@ metre ) high fence . An entrance to the secondary backyard was covered by trees and a tarpaulin . Privacy was enhanced by tents and outbuildings , and also housed a car that matched the description of the one used in the abduction . Electricity was supplied by extension cords . Law enforcement officers visited the residence at least twice , but did not ask to inspect the back yard , and did not detect the presence of Dugard or her children in the areas of the property that they did inspect . Witnesses interviewed stated Jaycee Dugard was seen in the house , and sometimes answered the front door to talk to people , but never stated there was a problem or attempted to leave . While the family kept to themselves , the girls were sometimes seen playing in the backyard or as passengers in Phillip 's car . 
 = = = Missed opportunities to rescue Dugard = = = 
 Police failed to make the connection that Jaycee Lee Dugard was kidnapped in South Lake Tahoe , the same location as Phillip 's 1976 kidnapping and rape of Katherine Callaway Hall . 
 On April 22 , 1992 , less than a year after her kidnapping , a man called the Contra Costa County Sheriff 's Department from a gas station less than two miles from the Garridos ' home . The caller reported that he saw Dugard in the gas station staring intently at a missing child poster of herself . The caller then reported seeing her leave in a large yellow van , possibly a Dodge . In 2009 , after Dugard 's release , an old yellow Dodge van was recovered from the Garrido property that matched the description of the van given in the call . The license plate was not reported in the 1992 call ; the caller , the girl , and the van were gone by the time police arrived . The caller never identified himself , and the police did not pursue the matter any further . In contradiction to this story , Jaycee Dugard reported that she never left the Garrido property from the day she was kidnapped until shortly before her first child was born in August 1994 . 
 In June 2002 , the fire department responded to a report of a juvenile with a shoulder injury that occurred in a swimming pool at the Garridos ' home . This information was not relayed to the parole office , which had no record of either a juvenile or a swimming pool at the Garridos ' address . 
 In 2006 , one of Phillip 's neighbors called 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 to inform them that there were tents in the backyard with children living there and that Phillip was " psychotic " with sexual addictions . A deputy sheriff spoke with Phillip at the front of the house for about 30 minutes and left after telling him that there would be a code violation if people were living outside on the property . After Dugard was found in August 2009 , the local Contra Costa County Sheriff , Warren E. <unk> issued an apology to the victims in a news conference . 
 On November 4 , 2009 , the California Office of the Inspector General issued a report that enumerated lapses by the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation that had contributed to Dugard 's continued captivity . The central finding was that Phillip was incorrectly classified as needing only low @-@ level supervision ; all other lapses derived from that mistake . In his report , the inspector general detailed an instance in which a parole agent encountered a 12 @-@ year @-@ old girl at the home but accepted Phillip 's explanation that " she was his brother 's daughter and [ the agent ] did nothing to verify it , " despite the fact that a call to Phillip 's brother verified that he did not have children . 
 = = Reappearance = = 
 On August 24 , 2009 , Phillip visited the San Francisco office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) and left a four @-@ page essay containing his ideas about religion and sexuality , suggesting that he had discovered a solution to problem behaviors like his past crimes . The essay described how he had cured his criminal sexual behaviors and how that information could be used to assist in curing other sexual predators by : " controlling human impulses that drive humans to commit dysfunctional acts . " On the same day , he went to a University of California , Berkeley police office with Dugard 's two daughters , seeking permission to hold a special event on campus as a part of his " God 's Desire " program . He spoke with U.C. Berkeley special events manager Lisa Campbell . She perceived his behavior as " erratic " and that the girls were " sullen and submissive . " She asked him to make an appointment for the next day , which he did , leaving his name in the process . Officer Ally Jacobs discovered , through a background check , that Phillip was a registered sex offender on federal parole for kidnapping and rape . When Phillip and the girls returned for their appointment at 2 : 00 p.m. the following day , August 25 , Jacobs made a point of sitting in during the meeting . The girls appeared to Jacobs to be pale , as if having not been exposed to sunlight , and their behavior unusual . As Phillip had multiple parole violations and the basis for an arrest , Jacobs phoned the parole office to relay her concerns , leaving a report of the meeting on voicemail . 
 After hearing Jacobs ' recorded message , two parole agents drove to the Garridos ' house later that day . Upon arrival , they handcuffed him and searched the house , finding only his wife Nancy and his elderly mother at home . Then the parole agents drove him back to the parole office . En route , he said that the girls who had accompanied him to UC Berkeley : " were the daughters of a relative , and he had permission from their parents to take them to the university . " Although the parole office had barred Phillip from being around minors a month before , and although Berkeley was 40 miles ( 64 kilometres ) from the Garridos ' Contra Costa residence , 15 mi ( 24 km ) in excess of the 25 mi ( 40 km ) limit he was allowed to travel from his home without permission from his parole agent , the agents overlooked this violation . After reviewing his file with a supervisor , they drove him home and ordered him to report back to the office again the next day to discuss further his visit to UC Berkeley , and to follow up on their concerns about the two girls . 
 Phillip arrived at the parole office in Concord , California on August 26 with his wife Nancy , the two girls , and Jaycee Dugard , who was introduced as " <unk> " . The parole officer decided to separate Phillip from the women and girls to obtain their identification . 
 Dugard , maintaining her false identity as " <unk> " , told investigators that the girls were her daughters . Although she indicated that she was aware that Phillip was a convicted sex offender , she stated that he was a " changed man " , a " great person " and was " good with her kids " , comments that were echoed by the two girls . When pressed for details that would confirm her identity , Dugard became " extremely defensive " and " agitated " , demanding to know why she was being " interrogated " , and subsequently stated that she was a battered wife from Minnesota who was in hiding from her abusive husband . The parole officer eventually called the Concord police . Upon the arrival of a police sergeant , Phillip admitted he had kidnapped and raped her . Only after this did Dugard identify herself as Jaycee Dugard . It was later suggested that Dugard was beginning to show signs of Stockholm syndrome during her questioning . Stockholm syndrome is a psychological phenomenon where , over time , captives begin to show fondness , compassion , and sometimes love for their captors . 
 Phillip and his wife were placed under arrest . An FBI Special Agent put Dugard on the telephone with her mother , Terry Probyn . Dugard retained custody of her children and was soon reunited with her mother . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Reunion and afterward = = = 
 Dugard 's aunt , Tina Dugard , and a former business associate of the Garridos ' , <unk> Molino , have commented that Dugard 's children looked healthy . Tina Dugard said that upon her meeting them after their reappearance , they " always appeared and behaved like normal kids " . Molino said of the times that she met them while they were captive " that in her presence the girls never acted robotically " and didn 't wear unusual clothing . 
 In the days following Dugard 's return , Carl Probyn , her stepfather , confirmed that Dugard and her daughters were in good health and intelligent ; their reunion was going well ; and they were proceeding slowly . He said his stepdaughter had developed a significant emotional bond with Phillip , and the two daughters cried when they learned of their father 's arrest . Jaycee Dugard 's aunt , Tina Dugard , said Jaycee 's daughters : " are clever , articulate , curious girls who have a bright future ahead of them . " Ernie Allen , president of the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children , said Dugard 's reappearance is an important event for families of other long @-@ term missing children , because it shows that there is hope even in long @-@ term cases . Notable abduction survivor Elizabeth Smart has stressed the importance of focusing on the future with a positive attitude as an effective approach to accepting what has happened . Shawn Hornbeck , another abduction survivor , also commented on the case , noting : " Coming out of what she 's had to endure is like entering a new world . It 's like a door has opened for her and she 's emerged from a world that 's black and white into one that 's full of color . " He opined that she was brainwashed , would feel angry and now needs to move on with her life . 
 Three weeks after her release , Dugard asked for the pets that were raised in the home . On October 14 , 2009 , People published the first verified photo of Jaycee Dugard as an adult on its cover . Dugard 's memoir , A Stolen Life : A Memoir , was published on July 12 , 2011 , by Simon & Schuster . Later , to regain trust with people , she would begin animal therapy by riding or petting horses with her mother Terry and her half sister Shayna . 
 = = = Police investigations = = = 
 Following the arrest , police searched the Garrido house extensively for evidence of other crimes . Because Phillip had access to his neighbor 's house , it was also searched for evidence . Police also searched the homes and business of one of Phillip 's printing business clients . Police agencies from Hayward and Dublin , California , conducted searches of the Garridos ' property for evidence pertaining to missing girls from those communities but turned up no clues . In July 2011 , Hayward police announced that Phillip has not been eliminated as a suspect and is still a person of interest in the abduction case of Michaela <unk> . <unk> was kidnapped in 1988 and Hayward is 55 miles ( 89 km ) from the Garridos ' Antioch home . 
 = = = Phillip 's statements = = = 
 On August 27 , 2009 , <unk> @-@ TV in Sacramento , California interviewed Phillip in his jail cell by telephone . During the interview , Phillip said , " In the end , this is going to be a powerful , heartwarming story " because , in his version of events : 
 My life has been straightened out . … Wait till you hear the story of what took place at this house . You 're going to be absolutely impressed . It 's a disgusting thing that took place with me at the beginning , but I turned my life completely around . 
 Phillip repeatedly told the reporter how he " filed documents " with the FBI on August 24 , 2009 , which , when they were published , would cause people to " fall over backwards " , and that he could not reveal more because he " had to protect law enforcement " , and " what happened " [ … ] was " something that humans have not understood well " . In the interview , Phillip denied he had ever harmed Dugard 's two daughters . He said their births changed his life and : " they slept in my arms every single night since birth . I never touched them . " On August 28 , 2009 , FBI spokesman Joseph <unk> confirmed that Phillip had indeed left the documents with the agency , as he had claimed , but declined to discuss further details . The document , titled Origin of Schizophrenia Revealed , was eventually released by the FBI . It is about stopping schizophrenics from turning violent and controlling sounds with the human mind . 
 = = = Legal proceedings = = = 
 On August 28 , 2009 , Phillip and his wife pleaded not guilty to charges including kidnapping , rape , and false imprisonment . The case was prosecuted in El Dorado County , by elected District Attorney Vern R. Pierson and Assistant District Attorney James A <unk> . A bail review / pre @-@ preliminary hearing was held September 14 , 2009 , at the El Dorado County Superior Court in Placerville , California . At the hearing , Superior Court Judge Douglas Phimister set bail for Phillip 's wife , Nancy at US $ 30 million . However , there was a no @-@ bail parole hold on Phillip . The judge kept Nancy in custody on a no @-@ bail hold but able to request bail at a later date . At the September 14 hearing , Phimister also granted a request from Phillip 's attorney to have a psychologist or psychiatrist appointed to conduct a confidential evaluation of Phillip . Such examinations can be used by the defense to assist in case preparation , and additional mental health examinations can be ordered at subsequent phases in the proceedings . On October 29 , 2009 , a short hearing was held to set a date for the next pre @-@ preliminary hearing when issues such as discovery were to be discussed . This hearing occurred on December 11 , 2009 . Katie Callaway Hall , whom Phillip kidnapped and raped in 1976 , appeared in the courtroom at the October and December hearings . She did not speak during either proceeding . 
 On November 5 , 2009 , Phimister ordered Nancy 's defense attorney , Gilbert Maines , to be removed from the case . According to a posting on the court 's website , the decision occurred in review of " confidential evidence " that has not been disclosed to the public , and details of the proceedings were kept sealed . The decision was immediately stayed until November 30 , 2009 . On November 12 , 2009 , Phimister appointed Stephen A. Tapson as interim counsel for Nancy . Gilbert Maines appealed the decision and received a favorable ruling by the California Third District Court of Appeal on December 15 , 2009 . On December 22 , 2009 , the same court gave the Eldorado Superior Court until January 2010 to respond to the ruling . Both Gilbert Maines and Stephen Tapson appeared at the discovery hearing on December 11 , 2009 . A hearing was held on January 21 , 2010 . At that hearing , Maines was removed from the case and Tapson was appointed defense counsel for Nancy . In addition , bail , in the amount of US $ 20 million , was set for Nancy . 
 At a press conference on February 28 , 2011 , Tapson said that Nancy and Phillip Garrido had both made a ' full confession ' in the case . The development came as lawyers for both sides re @-@ opened discussions on a possible plea deal that had the potential to obviate the need for a trial . Nancy 's attorney acknowledged that she was facing " 241 years , eight months to life " and that he was working for a reduced sentence in the 30 @-@ year range . He stated that the prosecutor had acknowledged that Phillip was a master manipulator and that Nancy was under both his influence and that of substances during the period of Dugard 's kidnapping , so should receive some consideration while alluding to parallels with kidnap victim Patty Hearst and to Stockholm syndrome . 
 On Thursday , April 7 , 2011 , instead of pleading guilty , as had been expected based on the previous statements , the Garridos pleaded not guilty to charges of kidnapping and raping Dugard , as well as other charges , in an amended Grand Jury indictment . Phillip 's attorney , public defender Susan Gellman , alleged that the grand jury might have been selected improperly and might have acted improperly . Gellman did not elaborate on her claim in the courtroom , but said outside that she had questions about the racial and geographic makeup of the grand jury that originally indicted the Garridos in September 2010 . Judge Phimister noted that there were issues about the process itself before the grand jury , and also stated that the court would consider whether the grand jury acted appropriately . These developments were largely unforeseen by attorney Stephen Tapson , who represented Nancy ; Tapson had said earlier that week that Phillip had made a deal with prosecutors to plead guilty and spend the rest of his life in prison . Gellman was upset with Tapson for telling reporters that her client had planned to plead guilty , saying that he should only speak about his own client , Nancy . Tapson said he found out about Gellman 's plans only late on April 6 . Neither attorney would elaborate further on the specific concerns about the grand jury . El Dorado , California District Attorney Vern Pierson said he did not think the complaints about the grand jury would ultimately derail the case against the Garridos . 
 On April 28 , 2011 , the Garridos pleaded guilty to kidnapping and rape by force . On June 2 , 2011 , Phillip was sentenced to 431 years to life imprisonment ; Nancy received 36 years to life imprisonment . Phillip is serving his sentence at California State Prison , Corcoran , while Nancy is incarcerated at Central California Women 's Facility in Chowchilla . Dugard did not attend the sentencing . 
 = = = Settlement with the State of California = = = 
 In July 2010 , the State of California approved a US $ 20 million settlement with Jaycee Dugard to compensate her for : " various lapses by the Corrections Department [ that contributed to ] Dugard 's continued captivity , ongoing sexual assault and mental and / or physical abuse . " The settlement , part of <unk> , was approved by the California State Assembly by a 70 to 2 vote , and by the California State Senate by a 30 to 1 vote . San Francisco County Superior Court Judge Daniel Weinstein , who mediated the settlement , stated that the settlement was reached to avoid a lawsuit , which would be a : " greater invasion of privacy and greater publicity for the state . " The bill was signed by California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger on July 9 . 
 = = = Lawsuit against the United States = = = 
 On September 22 , 2011 , Dugard filed suit in United States District Court for the Northern District of California accusing the United States of failing to monitor Phillip when he was a federal parolee . Dugard alleged in her lawsuit against the federal government that parole officials should have returned Phillip to prison for any number of parole violations that preceded her abduction , including testing positive for drugs and alcohol . Her lawsuit was rejected by the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals on March 15 , 2016 . The court ruled in a 2 – 1 decision that Dugard had not been victimized by Phillip at the time he was placed under federal parole supervision , and there was no way to anticipate she would become his victim . As a result , federal authorities in California had no duty to protect her or other members of the general public from him . In a dissenting opinion , Chief District Court Judge William Smith said the majority had improperly analyzed Dugard 's case , and said there was good reason to hold the government liable . 
 = = In media = = 
 Dugard documented her life in captivity in a book , A Stolen Life : A Memoir , which she wrote as part of her therapy with Rebecca Bailey , who specializes in post @-@ trauma family reunification . Dugard says she wrote the book , which was published in July 2011 , to assist other survivors of sexual abuse . A few days before the book was released , Dugard gave her first extensive television interview taped in Ojai , California , to ABC 's Diane Sawyer . 
 An American crime show on the Investigation Discovery network titled Wicked Attraction aired an episode about Phillip and Nancy Garrido , which detailed Jaycee Dugard 's kidnapping and recovery . 
 A documentary that aired in October 2009 on Channel 4 in Britain titled Captive for 18 years : Jaycee Lee focused on the story of Dugard 's kidnapping , recovery , and the beginnings of the trial including interviews with Jaycee 's stepfather . 
 Dugard was awarded a Lifetime Leadership honor at the third annual The DVF Awards on March 9 , 2012 for her courage and her <unk> Foundation , which provides support to families dealing with abduction and other tragedies . 
 Dugard 's second book , Freedom : My Book of Firsts , was released on July 12 , 2016 by Simon & Schuster . The book focuses on her life since the publication of A Stolen Life and her recovery and re @-@ integration into the world . She was again interviewed by Diane Sawyer a few days before publication . 
 = Tanum Tunnel = 
 Tanum Tunnel ( Norwegian : <unk> ) is 3 @,@ 590 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 11 @,@ 780 ft ) double @-@ track railway tunnel on the Asker Line , between Jong in Bærum and Åstad in Asker , Norway . It was built as part of the first state of the Asker Line , between Asker and Sandvika ; construction started in February 2002 and the tunnel opened on 27 August 2005 . The tunnel was built by AF Gruppen for the Norwegian National Rail Administration . Most of the tunneling was conducted using the drilling and blasting method , although the easternmost 800 meters ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) were built using the cut @-@ and @-@ cover method . After the tunnel opened , there have been problems with leaks damaging the superstructure . The tunnel has double track , is electrified and allows for a maximum speed of 160 kilometers per hour ( 100 mph ) . The cost to build the tunnel , excluding the superstructure , was 370 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) . The tunnel will accelerate intercity and regional traffic west of Oslo and free up capacity for the Oslo Commuter Rail on the Drammen Line . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The Tanum Tunnel is 3 @,@ 590 meters ( 11 @,@ 778 ft ) long and has a cross section varying between 105 and 115 square meters ( 1 @,@ 130 and 1 @,@ 240 sq ft ) . The tunnel consists of a 2 @,@ 718 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 8 @,@ 917 ft ) blasted section and a 800 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) , cut @-@ and @-@ cover section — the latter the easternmost part of the tunnel . It carries the double @-@ tracked Asker Line between Jong and Åstad . The tunnel runs mostly through Cambrian @-@ Silurian sedimentary slate , nodular limestone and shale , with local occurrences of Permian igneous rock . There is also a 400 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) section of less stable sedimentary rock in the Asker Group . The tunnel had a cover most of the way of between 50 and 100 meters ( 160 and 330 ft ) ; however at Billingstad there was a much lower margin , laying for the most at 10 to 15 meters ( 33 to 49 ft ) and at the least at 1 @.@ 5 meters ( 4 ft 11 in ) . At Åstad , the line runs 600 meters ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) in the open before entering the Skaugum Tunnel . The line is electrified at 15 kV 16 2 ⁄ 3 Hz AC and allows a maximum speed of 160 kilometres per hour ( 100 mph ) . The tunnel has frost insulation 300 meters ( 980 ft ) into the tunnel form each end . The tunnel has frost fans which ensure that the air stays put in the middle of the tunnel , thus hindering cold air from flowing past the frost isolation . 
 = = History = = 
 The Asker Line runs from Lysaker Station via Sandvika Station to Asker Station , in the municipalities of Bærum and Asker . The line was built to allow increased railway traffic though the main corridor west of Oslo . Previously , the only railway west of Oslo was the Drammen Line , which has limited capacity and is used by a mix of local , regional , intercity and freight trains . This caused many delays and poor utilization of tracks , as some trains make many stops and others only a few . The Asker Line allows regional and intercity trains to by @-@ pass local stations east of Asker while local and freight trains remain on the Drammen Line . The Asker Line was built in two stages : the first , from Asker to Sandvika , was constructed between 2001 and 2005 . The second stage , from Sandvika to Lysaker , was constructed between 2007 and 2011 . The other two tunnels on the Asker Line are the 3 @,@ 590 @-@ meter @-@ long ( 11 @,@ 780 ft ) <unk> Tunnel and the 5 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometer @-@ long ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) Bærum Tunnel . 
 The Norwegian National Rail Administration awarded the contract to build the Tanum Tunnel to AF <unk> , part of AF Gruppen . The tunneling cost NOK 370 million , including the open section between Solstad and Åstad , but excluding superstructure . The main part of the tunnel was built using the drilling and blasting method , using two points of entry . Work on the tunneling started in 2002 and was concluded in February 2004 . Construction included the removal of 486 @,@ 000 cubic meters ( 17 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of earthwork and the laying of 160 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 160 @,@ 000 long tons ; 180 @,@ 000 short tons ) of ballast . Laying of tracks , signaling , power supply and other superstructures were done by Baneservice . The cost of superstructures for the entire section from Asker to Sandvika was NOK 70 million . The work was completed by November 2004 . The opening of the tunnel and the rest of the section from Asker to Sandvika took place on 27 August 2005 . 
 A concern from people living along the tunnel was that they would be subject to low @-@ frequency noise . Originally the municipalities of Asker and Bærum had demanded that residents be subject to a maximum of 27 decibel A @-@ weighting ( dBA ) , but the National Rail Administration appealed the requirements and was permitted to allow up to 32 dBA . In March 2004 , a test was done in the tunnel to insure that the requirements would be met , as low @-@ frequency sound is difficult to predict . Measurements after the opening of the tunnel showed background noise of 30 dBA , that no @-@ one was subject to 32 dBA or higher , and that it was nearly impossible to measure the passing of trains . 
 Among the major concerns was leaks ; during the construction on the Romerike Tunnel , there was a one @-@ year delay and severe cost overruns due to improper leak handling methods . Therefore , one of the main focuses in the Skaugum Tunnel project was to avoid similar leaks . The contract specified a maximum leakage of 4 liters ( 0 @.@ 88 imp gal ; 1 @.@ 1 U.S. gal ) per minute per 100 meters ( 330 ft ) . The contractor attempted to achieve this by extending the time used for pre @-@ injection of concrete . However , there was still water dripping into the tunnel , which caused several types of damage . Some places the water dripped onto the track , causing rust ; other places water dripped onto electrical equipment . There was also issues with water running down the walls and collecting in the cable conduit , and the water with limestone dripping on the ballast and mixing the ballast with limestone . By 2011 , the emergency lighting system had to be replaced because of the high humidity . The National Rail Administration has stated that savings made to the specifications in the water and frost methods have caused higher maintenance costs because the small leaks which are present do a lot of harm . In addition , areas with leaks suffer from icing . This has been part of a national trend where older tunnels are nearly maintenance @-@ free , while newer tunnels have incurred high maintenance costs . 
 = Piedmont Park = 
 Piedmont Park is an urban park in Atlanta , Georgia , located about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) northeast of Downtown , between the Midtown and Virginia Highland neighborhoods . Originally the land was owned by Dr. Benjamin Walker , who used it as his out @-@ of @-@ town gentleman 's farm and residence . He sold the land in 1887 to the Gentlemen 's Driving Club ( later renamed the Piedmont Driving Club ) , who wanted to establish an exclusive club and racing ground for horse enthusiasts . The Driving Club entered an agreement with the Piedmont Exposition Company , headed by prominent Atlantan Charles A. Collier , to use the land for fairs and expositions and later gave the park its name . 
 The park was originally designed by Joseph Forsyth Johnson to host the first of two major expositions held in the park in the late 19th century . The Piedmont Exposition opened in October 1887 to great fanfare . The event was a success and set the stage for the Cotton States and International Exposition which was held in the park seven years later in 1895 . Both exhibitions showcased the prosperity of the region that had occurred during and after the Reconstruction period . In the early 20th century , a redesign plan called the Olmsted plan , was begun by the sons of New York Central Park architect , Frederick Law Olmsted . The effort led to the addition of scenic paths in the park and the joining of the park with the Ansley park system . 
 Over the years , the park has also served as an athletic center for the city . Atlanta 's first professional baseball team , the Atlanta Crackers , played in the park from 1902 to 1904 . Several important intercollegiate rivalries were also forged in the park including the University of Georgia vs. Georgia Tech baseball rivalry and Georgia versus Auburn football which has been called the " Deep South 's Oldest Rivalry " . 
 Throughout the 20th century , many improvements have been made in the park , including the addition of covered picnic areas , tennis facilities , the Lake Clara Meer dock and visitors center , and two playgrounds . In 2008 , a ground @-@ breaking ceremony was held for a 53 @-@ acre ( 210 @,@ 000 m2 ) extension to the park . On April 12 , 2011 , Mayor Kasim Reed cut the ribbon to open the first phase of a major expansion into the northern third of the park . Additional areas at the far north of the park ( near Ansley Mall ) are to be developed next . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 Atlanta was a rapidly growing city in the years before Piedmont Park . From 1860 to 1890 , the population jumped from 9 @,@ 554 to 65 @,@ 533 residents . Those years saw the opening of many education institutions such as Morehouse College ( 1867 ) , Clark College ( 1869 ) , Spelman College ( 1881 ) , Morris Brown College ( 1882 ) , Georgia School of Technology ( now known as the Georgia Institute of Technology ) ( 1885 ) , and Agnes Scott College ( 1890 ) . John B. Gordon , a distinguished Confederate general , was Governor of Georgia . 
 The area soon to be known as Piedmont Park was owned by Benjamin Walker , who purchased the 189 acres ( 0 @.@ 76 km2 ) in the 1830s from a man who had won the land in the land lottery . Walker farmed the land until , in 1887 , he sold the land to the Gentlemen 's Driving Club , known today as the Piedmont Driving Club , who planned " to form exclusive club and racing ground for horse enthusiasts " . The driving club entered into an agreement with the Piedmont Exposition Company to use the grounds around the track as exposition space . Charles A. Collier , a prominent Atlanta businessman and former lawyer , was president of the company . Soon after , a main building , grandstands , and club house were built for the track . 
 = = = The 1887 Piedmont Exposition = = = 
 The first exposition ever held in Piedmont Park , the Piedmont Exposition of 1887 , opened on October 10 . The main building constructed for the Exposition was 570 feet ( 170 m ) long , 126 feet ( 38 m ) wide , and two stories high . The first day opened with 20 @,@ 000 visitors . Samuel J. Randall opened the Exposition with a speech on the success of the resurrected post @-@ civil war south . When his speech concluded , General Pierce M. B. Young and his men fired cannons to signal the opening of the events . 
 Exhibitors showed off a variety of items including works of art , local raw materials like manganese marble , and wood work . Many prominent figures of the day were in attendance to see the displays . Governor David B. Hill of New York spoke at the event as well as President Grover Cleveland who attended with his wife , Frances Folsom . Over 50 @,@ 000 people were in attendance for Cleveland 's speech . When the exposition was over , civic leaders said that it had successfully expanded Atlanta 's reputation as a place to visit and to conduct business . 
 The Exposition was also a chance for Atlanta to prove that it was ready to host a world 's fair . The Executive Committee of the Fair was invited to attend the event under the bidding of Charles Reynolds , Secretary of the Piedmont Exposition Company . 
 = = = The " Deep South 's Oldest Rivalry " = = = 
 Five years later , Piedmont Park was the location of the second football game and the beginning of the " Deep South 's Oldest Rivalry " between Auburn University ( then named Agricultural and Mechanical College of Alabama ) and the University of Georgia . The game was arranged by former Johns Hopkins classmates , Dr. Charles Herty of Georgia and Dr. George Petrie of Auburn . Auburn won the game 10 – 0 . It was rumored afterward that Georgia 's mascot , a goat ( it wasn 't until 1921 that Georgia officially became the Bulldogs ) , was the main course at a barbecue held by Georgia fans after the game . 
 = = = Cotton States and International Exposition ( 1895 ) = = = 
 In 1894 , the Piedmont Exposition Company offered to sell the land to the city of Atlanta for $ 165 @,@ 000 @.@ 00 , but Mayor John B. Goodwin refused . Thus , The park remained in private hands and outside the city limits for another ten years . 
 The Cotton States and International Exposition which opened for 100 days beginning on September 18 , 1895 and ending December 31 , 1895 , attracted visitors from the U.S. and 13 countries . Over $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 was spent on the transformation of Piedmont Park . The government allocated $ 250 @,@ 000 for the construction of a government building and many states and countries such as Argentina also had their own buildings . Also constructed for the fair were the Tropical gardens , now known as the Atlanta Botanical Garden , and Lake Clara Meer which was originally a pond but was expanded to 11 @.@ 5 acres ( 47 @,@ 000 m2 ) for the event . Today , the stone balustrades scattered around the park are the only part of the enormous main building . The park remains largely as Joseph Forsyth Johnson designed it for the exposition although some changes were made during the Olmsted planning phase . However , most of the buildings that were constructed for the exposition were made of local Georgia granite and the buildings were dismantled after the event so that the granite could be sold to absolve the debt that the city incurred to hold the fair . 
 Booker T. Washington delivered his famous Atlanta Exposition Speech at the Expo , which is " widely regarded as one of the most significant speeches in American history . " In his speech , Washington pushed for progress but not integration , a point that angered many other black leaders such as W. E. B. Du Bois . 
 Attractions included Buffalo Bill 's Wild West Show , the Liberty Bell , and the first public demonstration of C. Francis Jenkins and Thomas Armat 's motion picture projection device which they called the Phantoscope . John Philip Sousa 's " King Cotton " march was created for the expo and was performed at the ceremony , and was conducted by the composer himself . 
 After the Exposition , the park continued to be extremely popular and was a magnet for growth in the area . State fairs and holiday celebrations were held at the park . Street car lines to the park increased . It was a generally prosperous time . 
 = = = The beginnings of Atlanta baseball = = = 
 In March 1898 , the baseball fields were finally completed . On April 16 , 1898 , the first baseball game between Georgia and Georgia Tech , then known as the Georgia School of Technology , was played . From 1902 until 1904 , the Atlanta Crackers , the city 's original professional baseball team played ball on the fields of Piedmont Park before moving to a stadium on Ponce de Leon Avenue . 
 = = = The Olmsted plan = = = 
 The year 1904 for was a watershed time for the park . The preceding year , the prominent Atlantan George Washington Collier died . Collier had owned 202 acres ( 0 @.@ 82 km2 ) of land to the west and north of the park that was sold for $ 300 @,@ 000 to developers . The city bought the park for $ 98 @,@ 000 in 1904 , incorporating Piedmont Park into Atlanta 's city limits . Mayor Evan Howell agreed to purchase the park , but only if it included those developed areas adjacent to the park which would add approximately $ 35 @,@ 000 to $ 40 @,@ 000 in tax revenues annually . 
 The main developer of Collier 's land was Edwin Ansley , who created the Ansley Park subdivision under the guidelines set by the <unk> . The result was curvy streets surrounding " mini @-@ parks " comprising a total of 25 acres ( 100 @,@ 000 m2 ) . In 1912 , these parks were deeded to the city . 
 In 1909 , the sons of Frederick Law Olmsted , landscape architect for Central Park in New York , Carey and Frederick , Jr. were asked to design the park 's master plan while they were at work on Grant Park . The city agreed to pay $ 1 @,@ 800 for the plan , but Olmsted was concerned that Atlanta might not have enough money for the necessary improvements . 
 In 1910 , the brothers submitted a plan for the park that was to include a 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) scenic path and driveways that would link Piedmont Park to the streets of Ansley Park . Joining the parks was a success and thereafter , the parks were known as Twin Parks . Although never fully implemented , the Olmsted plan had a great effect on the development in the surrounding area . 
 = = = 20th @-@ century growth and development = = = 
 The park 's first bathhouse was opened in 1911 . Swimming in the lake was allowed until 1973 , when the city opened a pool in the park . 
 On January 29 , 1913 , Calvin <unk> applied for a building permit to construct the Piedmont Park Apartments . The apartments were designed by Leila Ross Wilburn and were decidedly middle @-@ class unlike some of the other developments in the area . The apartments remained middle @-@ class up until about 1960 , and residents included such prominent Atlantans as accounting company president T. C. Dunlap and lawyer J. B. Stewart . In 1913 , seven clay courts were built where the 1895 Cotton States and International Exposition 's Manufacturers and Liberal Arts Building once was . Eight more courts were added in 1914 to accommodate the overwhelming demand . 
 Notable additions and buildings include the bandstand , built in 1915 ; a picnic shelter constructed by the WPA in 1936 ; the Noguchi " Playscapes " , completed in 1976 under the aegis of the High Museum and a grant from the National Endowment for the Arts and designed by world @-@ renowned artist and sculptor Isamu Noguchi , noteworthy as the only public work by Noguchi in the U.S. In 2002 , the dog park was opened . 
 The Noguchi " Playscapes " underwent restoration in 2005 under Eddie Granderson , public arts manager of the City of Atlanta . Jablonski Berkowitz Conservation Inc. was selected to do the restoration and assessments began in September of that year . The company was charged with bringing the playground up to safety codes and restoring the original paint . 
 = = = 2008 drought = = = 
 In January 2008 , city officials announced that the Peachtree Road Race , Atlanta Pride Festival , the Atlanta Jazz Festival , and the Dogwood Festival would not be held in the park due to extreme drought . Some festivals which don 't make use of green space were still allowed in the park . The Atlanta Arts Festival ran from September 12 – 14 , 2008 , and utilized only paved areas . Other festivals were temporarily moved to alternate venues , such as Centennial Olympic Park . The drought in Atlanta ended by late 2009 . In 2010 , several events returned to Piedmont Park , including the Dogwood Festival , the Jazz Festival , and Screen on the Green . 
 = = = 2011 expansion = = = 
 Approximately 50 acres ( 20 ha ) in the northwest portion of the 187 @-@ acre ( 76 ha ) park had remained woodlands into the 21st century . In 2007 , a park expansion plan called for a new parking deck as well as " open green space , bicycle and walking trails , formal and community gardens , an interactive water feature , children 's playgrounds , a skate park , athletic fields , and woodlands " . The project was expected to cost $ 72 million . 
 On April 23 , 2008 , a ground @-@ breaking ceremony was held at the Bathhouse for the 53 @-@ acre ( 21 ha ) expansion of the Park . The pool and bathhouse are part of a huge Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ( LEED ) renovation that cost around $ 7 @.@ 8 million and was completed in early summer 2009 . The renovation features accessibility , a warming kitchen , WiFi , a pool with beach entry , <unk> , current channel , vortex , fountains , separate splash pad , lap lanes , landscaped deck environment , and concessions . A new area featuring a Bocce ball court and green space with an arbor opened in May 2010 . 
 On April 12 , 2011 , Mayor Kasim Reed cut the ribbon to open the first phase of a major expansion into the northern third of the park . Areas opened include two oval @-@ shaped plazas ( " The <unk> " and " The Promenade " , which contains the interactive Legacy Fountain ) , the Lower Meadow , the Six Springs Wetlands , and a vastly expanded dog park . 
 = = = 2013 expansion = = = 
 Construction began in early 2013 on areas at the far north of the park , including The Northwoods , Piedmont Commons , and Piedmont Gardens . New park entrances are to be added at the eastern end of Westminster Dr. ( off Piedmont Ave . ) , the northern end of Dutch Valley Pl . , and at 1514 Monroe just south of Piedmont Ave . , on the site of Agnes & Muriel 's restaurant . Map There are already dirt trails that follow Clear Creek and the BeltLine northwards connecting the 2011 and 2013 expansion areas and providing pedestrian access to the Ansley Mall area north of the park , and to the BeltLine trail going further north . 
 = = Piedmont Park Conservancy = = 
 The Piedmont Park Conservancy is a 501 ( c ) 3 non @-@ profit organization that is in charge of park improvements and 90 percent of the Park 's daily maintenance care and security . The Conservancy was founded in 1989 to revitalize the rapidly deteriorating park . Since then , it has raised and invested $ 23 million in private funds making the park , once again , the most visited green space in Atlanta . 
 = = Activities and facilities = = 
 = = = Outdoor activities = = = 
 The park hosts several miles of paved paths suitable for walking , running , biking , and inline skating . Skate Escape across from the park at the 12th Street entrance rents both bikes and skates . On weekend afternoons , skateboarders and inline skaters often share the open , paved area inside the 12th Street entrance . 
 Piedmont Park has picnic shelters located just to the East of the north soccer field . There are also various picnic tables and benches throughout the park . Many visitors choose to picnic on the expansive lawns as well . The first grill in Piedmont Park was erected for the 1895 Cotton States Exposition where the administrative offices now sit . There are 22 grills throughout the park . No portable grills are allowed . 
 The Noguchi " <unk> " is located near the 12th Street Gate . The geometrically shaped , modernist playground includes a soaring swing set , slide , sand pit , climbing dome and more made of bright and exciting colors . Also in the park is a new playground known as Mayor 's Grove . It was designed as a Boundless Playgrounds and features a high level of accessibility and interactive play . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Piedmont Park is a popular place for organized sports . The Sharon E. Lester Tennis Center at Piedmont Park is a fully staffed , public facility with 12 lighted hard courts , offering leagues , lessons , and supplies . 
 The Active Oval has two softball fields , two soccer fields , and two beach volleyball courts , all ringed by a dirt running path . Kickball leagues also use the softball fields . 
 The park 's swimming center , once closed for renovations , re @-@ opened in summer of 2009 . 
 = = = Fishing and the lake = = = 
 The lake is located in the south east part of the park . Fishing is permitted in the lake , which is stocked with large mouth bass , crappie , bream , and catfish . A 2002 renovation of the lake added a new bridge connecting the two bodies of water and three fishing piers located around the lake . 
 Clara Meer Dock is located at the west corner of the lake . Just above the Dock sits the historic Visitor Center building . Clara Meer Dock forms an amphitheater @-@ like space nestled into the western end of the lake . Clara Meer Dock is often used for wedding ceremonies . Rental of the dock also includes the Visitor 's Center . The Visitor 's Center features a barrel ceiling with a painted mural called " A Day at the Park " by Ralph Gilbert . The center seats 40 persons inside and over 200 more on the adjoining lawn and dock . The Dock seats up to 120 for ceremony , or up to 100 for table dining or possible dance floor area . 
 Mayor 's Grove is the newer of the two playgrounds in Piedmont Park . It was designed as a Boundless playground and features a high level of accessibility and interactive play . 
 = = = Dogs = = = 
 With the exception of some festival weekends and special events , dogs are permitted in Piedmont Park , on leashes 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) or shorter for safety reasons . Owners must clean up after their dogs , and the park has a half @-@ dozen plastic bag dispensing stations to facilitate this . Several of the park 's water fountains also have a ground @-@ level basin for dogs to use . 
 Just north of the Park Road entrance bridge are two fenced @-@ in Dog Parks where friendly dogs ( and their owners ) can cavort with each other off @-@ leash . Brand new , vastly expanded parks for small and large dogs were opened in Apr 2011 . 
 The Leash @-@ free Alliance of Piedmont Park ( <unk> ) is a volunteer group that works with the Conservancy on dog park improvements , fundraising efforts , and clean up projects . 
 = = = Special events = = = 
 Piedmont Park is a central focal point of Atlanta 's Midtown community . The park is home to various annual celebrations and events , including Atlanta Pride Festival , the Atlanta Jazz Festival , the Atlanta Dogwood Festival , Music Midtown , and Festival Peachtree Latino . A summer series of classic films , Screen on the Green , is also aired in the park for local residents . 
 On the weekend and holidays , the park comes alive with music , intramural sports , and fun festivities . In 2004 , Georgia Shakespeare Festival added an annual series of free performances entitled " Shake on the Lake " with Lake Clara Meer as a backdrop . A centennial celebration was held for the park in June 2004 . In 2007 , the Allman Brothers Band and Dave Matthews Band played a concert with proceeds benefiting the planned expansion to the park . Dave Matthews Band 's performance was later released as a live DVD as well as their eighth live album , Live at Piedmont Park . Sir Paul McCartney performed in Piedmont Park to benefit the conservancy on August 15 , 2009 . The Eagles performed at the park on October 16 , 2010 , also as a benefit for the conservancy . In 2011 , Music Midtown returned from its five @-@ year hiatus , hosting headliners Coldplay and The Black Keys in Piedmont Park . 
 = = Park schedule = = 
 The park is open from 6 : 00 AM to 11 : 00 PM every day . 
 = Invasion of Tulagi ( May 1942 ) = 
 The invasion of Tulagi , on 3 – 4 May 1942 , was part of Operation Mo , the Empire of Japan 's strategy in the South Pacific and South West Pacific Area in 1942 . The plan called for Imperial Japanese Navy troops to capture Tulagi and nearby islands in the Solomon Islands Protectorate . The occupation of Tulagi by the Japanese was intended to cover the flank of and provide reconnaissance support for Japanese forces that were advancing on Port Moresby in New Guinea , provide greater defensive depth for the major Japanese base at Rabaul , and serve as a base for Japanese forces to threaten and interdict the supply and communication routes between the United States and Australia and New Zealand . 
 Without the means to effectively resist the Japanese offensive in the Solomons , the British Resident Commissioner of the Solomon Islands protectorate and the few Australian troops assigned to defend Tulagi evacuated the island just before the Japanese forces arrived on 3 May . The next day , however , a U.S. aircraft carrier task force en route to resist the Japanese forces advancing on Port Moresby ( later taking part in the Battle of the Coral Sea ) struck the Japanese Tulagi landing force in an air attack , destroying or damaging several of the Japanese ships and aircraft involved in the landing operation . Nevertheless , the Japanese troops successfully occupied Tulagi and began the construction of a small naval base . 
 Over the next several months , the Japanese established a naval refueling , communications , and seaplane reconnaissance base on Tulagi and the nearby islets of Gavutu and Tanambogo , and in July 1942 began to build a large airfield on nearby Guadalcanal . The Japanese activities on Tulagi and Guadalcanal were observed by Allied reconnaissance aircraft , as well as by Australian coastwatcher personnel stationed in the area . Because these activities threatened the Allied supply and communication lines in the South Pacific , Allied forces counter @-@ attacked with landings of their own on Guadalcanal and Tulagi on 7 August 1942 , initiating the critical Guadalcanal campaign and a series of combined arms battles between Allied and Japanese forces that , along with the New Guinea campaign , decided the course of the war in the South Pacific . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 7 December 1941 , the Japanese attacked the U.S. Pacific fleet at Pearl Harbor , Hawaii . The attack crippled most of the U.S. Pacific Fleet 's battleships and started a formal state of war between the two nations . In launching this war , Japanese leaders sought to neutralize the American fleet , seize possessions rich in natural resources , and obtain strategic military bases to defend their far @-@ flung empire . Soon after , other nations — including the United Kingdom , Australia , and New Zealand — joined the U.S. as Allies in the war against Japan . In the words of the Japanese Navy 's Combined Fleet " Secret Order Number One " , dated 1 November 1941 , the goals of the initial Japanese campaigns in the impending war were to , " ( eject ) British and American strength from the Netherlands Indies and the Philippines , ( and ) to establish a policy of autonomous self @-@ sufficiency and economic independence . " To support these goals , during the first few months of 1942 Japanese forces also attacked and took control of the Philippines , Thailand , Malaya , Singapore , the Netherlands East Indies , Wake Island , New Britain , the Gilbert Islands , and Guam . 
 Vice Admiral Shigeyoshi Inoue — commander of the Japanese 4th Fleet ( also called the " South Seas Force " ) consisting of most of the naval units in the South Pacific area — advocated the seizing of Lae , Salamaua , and Port Moresby in New Guinea and Tulagi in the Solomon Islands . Inoue believed that the capture and control of these locations would provide greater security for the major Japanese base at Rabaul on New Britain . Japan 's Naval General Staff endorsed Inoue 's argument and began planning further operations , using these locations as supporting bases , to seize Nauru , Ocean Island , New Caledonia , Fiji , and Samoa and thereby cut the supply lines between Australia and the U.S. , with the goal of reducing or eliminating Australia as a threat to Japanese positions in the South Pacific . 
 The Imperial Japanese Army supported the idea of taking Port Moresby and in April 1942 , with the Japanese Navy , developed a plan for the attack that was titled " Operation Mo " . The plan also included the seizure of Tulagi , a small island in the southern Solomon Islands , where a seaplane base would be set up for potential air operations against Allied territories and forces in the South Pacific . Although Japanese Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto — commander of the Combined Fleet — was concurrently planning an operation that he hoped would lure the U.S. Pacific Fleet into a decisive showdown in the central Pacific , he detached some of his large warships to support the Mo operation and placed Inoue in charge of the naval portion of the operation . 
 A large force consisting of two heavy aircraft carriers , one light aircraft carrier , a seaplane carrier , nine cruisers , and 13 destroyers — split into several elements — was to guard the Japanese Port Moresby invasion convoy as well as to engage any Allied naval warships that approached to contest the invasion . The Tulagi invasion force , consisting of the destroyers Kikuzuki and <unk> , minelayer / transports Okinoshima , and <unk> Maru , auxiliary minesweepers Wa # 1 , Wa # 2 , and transports Hagoromo Maru , <unk> Maru # 2 , Tama Maru , and Azumasan Maru , subchasers Toshi Maru # 3 and Tama Maru # 8 and commanded by Rear Admiral Kiyohide Shima ( flag on Okinoshima ) , departed from Rabaul on 30 April and headed towards the Solomon Islands . Rear Admiral Aritomo Gotō provided air cover for the Tulagi invasion with his Covering Group of one light carrier ( Shōhō ) , four cruisers , and one destroyer located just west of the central Solomons . A separate Cover Force ( sometimes referred to as the Tulagi Support Group ) — commanded by Rear Admiral <unk> Marumo and consisting of two light cruisers , the seaplane tender Kamikawa Maru , and three gunboats — joined the Covering Group in supporting the Tulagi invasion . Once Tulagi was secured on 3 or 4 May , the Covering Group and Cover Force were to reposition to help cover the Port Moresby invasion . 
 At the time , Tulagi was the capital of the British Solomon Islands Protectorate , which included all of the islands of the Solomons except Bougainville and Buka . William Sydney Marchant , the British Resident Commissioner of the Solomons and commander of the local defense forces — described by historian Walter Lord as a " bewildered elderly Englishman " — directed the evacuation of most of the white civilian residents to Australia in February 1942 . Marchant was evacuated to Malaita the following month . 
 The only Allied military forces at Tulagi were 24 commandos from the Australian Army 's 2 / 1st Independent Company , under Captain A. L. Goode , and about 25 personnel from 11 Squadron RAAF , under F / O R. B. <unk> , operating a seaplane base on nearby Gavutu @-@ Tanambogo with four PBY Catalina maritime patrol aircraft . Three Allied coastwatchers were also located nearby , on Guadalcanal island . The task of the coastwatchers was to report on any enemy movements , or suspicious activity , that they observed in the vicinity of their stations . In the belief that it might prevent them being executed for espionage , all of the coastwatchers were commissioned as Royal Australian Naval Volunteer Reserve officers , and they were directed by Lieutenant Commander Eric Feldt , who was located at Townsville in Australia . 
 Throughout most of April , the Japanese conducted " desultory " bombing raids on Tulagi with aircraft based at Rabaul or nearby that caused little , if any , damage . The coastwatchers on Guadalcanal were usually able to radio advance warning to the Australian troops on Tulagi of the approaching Japanese aircraft , but the troops did not have large enough weaponry — three Vickers machine guns and one Bren light machine gun — to seriously challenge the Japanese bombers . On 25 April , Tulagi was bombed by eight Japanese aircraft . Similar raids occurred daily over the next week , with one raid on 1 May heavily damaging one of the Catalinas at Gavutu . The remaining Catalinas successfully evacuated that same day . 
 Allied intelligence personnel had deciphered much of the Japanese Mo plans through radio intercepts at the Allied Fleet Radio Units ( radio intelligence centers ) in Melbourne , Australia and Pearl Harbor , Hawaii . Based on this intelligence , on 22 April , U.S. Admiral Chester Nimitz — stationed at Pearl Harbor — directed Allied forces towards the Coral Sea area to interdict the Japanese Mo operation . On 27 April , the U.S. aircraft carrier USS Yorktown 's Task Force 17 ( TF 17 ) , under the command of Vice Admiral Frank Jack Fletcher , sortied from Tonga and was joined by the U.S. carrier USS Lexington 's TF 11 300 nmi ( 350 mi ; 560 km ) northwest of New Caledonia on 1 May . That same day , Fletcher detached TF 11 to refuel , expecting to rejoin with Lexington and her escorts on 4 May at a predetermined location in the Coral Sea . 
 = = Landings and air attacks = = 
 On 2 May , coastwatcher Jack Read on Bougainville reported that a large force of Japanese ships , believed to be part of the Japanese Tulagi invasion force , had departed from the Buka area . Later that day , coastwatcher D. G. Kennedy on New Georgia island sighted and reported a large Japanese force of ships heading towards the southern Solomons . Soon after , Goode and <unk> — anticipating that the Japanese would attack with overwhelming numbers — ordered the execution of a pre @-@ planned evacuation operation and began the destruction and demolition of their equipment and facilities on Tulagi and Gavutu @-@ Tanambogo . The RAAF personnel and commandos embarked on two small ships early in the morning on 3 May to begin the trip to Vila , New Hebrides , just as Shima 's ships entered Savo sound to begin their landings on Tulagi . The ship with the RAAF personnel spent the day with coastwatcher and protectorate district officer Martin Clemens at Aola on Guadalcanal and departed that night . 
 Supporting the Japanese landings were seaplanes from Kamikawa Maru , temporarily based at Thousand Ships Bay at Santa Isabel Island . About 400 Japanese naval troops — mainly from the 3rd Kure Special Naval Landing Force — disembarked from the transport ship on barges and immediately began construction of facilities on Tulagi and Gavutu @-@ Tanambogo . Aircraft from Shōhō covered the landings until early afternoon , when Gotō 's force turned toward Bougainville to refuel in preparation to support the landings at Port Moresby . Once the Japanese troops were ashore , six seaplanes landed in Tulagi harbor as part of the establishment of the planned seaplane base there . 
 At 17 : 00 on 3 May , Fletcher was notified that the Japanese Tulagi invasion force had been sighted the day before approaching the southern Solomons . Unable to communicate with the Lexington task force because of the need to maintain radio silence , Yorktown 's task force proceeded independently toward Guadalcanal in order to be in position to launch airstrikes against the Japanese forces at Tulagi the next morning . 
 At 07 : 01 on 4 May , Yorktown launched a first strike consisting of 12 TBD Devastator torpedo bombers and 28 SBD Dauntless dive bombers from a position about 160 km ( 86 nmi ; 99 mi ) south of Guadalcanal . The aircraft began their attacks on Shima 's ships anchored near Tulagi at 08 : 50 , taking the Japanese ships by surprise and at anchor . Okinoshima and the two destroyers were positioned to provide a protective barrier for Azumasan Maru and <unk> Maru which were busy unloading troops and materiel . The three minesweepers had just got underway to support the Port Moresby invasion and were still near Tulagi . Although the U.S. pilots from the first strike claimed many bomb and torpedo hits on the anchored ships , they actually only hit Okinoshima , causing minor damage , and Kikuzuki , causing major damage . Kikuzuki — with the assistance of one of the subchasers — was beached on Gavutu in an attempt to keep her from sinking . During this time , all of the other ships weighed anchor and attempted to escape from the harbor . One U.S. dive bomber destroyed a Japanese Mitsubishi <unk> " Pete " floatplane that attempted to take off during the attack . 
 Yorktown 's second strike — utilizing the same aircraft — returned to Tulagi and began their attack at 12 : 10 on the Japanese ships , many of which were now at full steam and attempting to put distance between themselves and Tulagi harbor . The second strike hit and sank the minesweepers # 1 and # 2 and severely damaged Tama Maru northeast of Savo Island . Another Japanese seaplane was shot down by a U.S. dive bomber during the second strike . After four F4F @-@ 3 / 3A Wildcat fighters from Yorktown joined the strike , the fighters shot down two more Japanese floatplanes over Florida Island . The four U.S. fighters then strafed <unk> , killing her captain and nine others of her crew , and causing moderate damage to the ship . Two or three other Japanese floatplanes were damaged in Tulagi harbor and their crews were killed . 
 A third , smaller strike from Yorktown arrived at 15 : 30 and caused moderate damage to Azumasan Maru and Okinoshima . One of the TBDs in the third strike became lost , ran out of fuel , and ditched in the ocean about 60 km ( 32 nmi ; 37 mi ) south of Guadalcanal . Two of the Wildcats from the second strike also ran out of fuel and crash landed on the southern coast of Guadalcanal . Fletcher sent the destroyers USS Hammann and Perkins to rescue the aircrews from the three aircraft . Hammann was able to recover both fighter pilots , but Perkins was unable to locate the TBD 's crew . Both destroyers returned to Yorktown 's task force late that evening as the task force turned away from Guadalcanal toward the southeast in order to refuel and rendezvous with Lexington the next day . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On 5 May , Kikuzuki slid off of the shore of Gavutu and sank in Tulagi harbor , a total loss ( 09 ° 07 ′ S 160 ° 12 ′ E ) . Tama Maru foundered two days later . The other surviving , damaged Japanese ships were able to reach Rabaul and Kavieng for repairs . Hagoromo Maru and <unk> Maru # 2 joined the Port Moresby Invasion Group . On 10 May , as Okinoshima participated in the first Japanese attempt to take Ocean ( Banaba ) and Nauru Islands , titled Operation RY , she was sunk by the submarine USS S @-@ 42 off New Ireland ( 05 ° 06 ′ S 153 ° 48 ′ E ) . A total of 87 Japanese naval personnel died in the 4 May air attacks on Tulagi , and 36 of the landing troops were seriously injured . 
 The lost Yorktown TBD aircrew reached Guadalcanal after drifting in the ocean for three days . A Roman Catholic missionary took them to Martin Clemens who arranged for a boat to take them to San Cristobal . From San Cristobal , another boat took them to the New Hebrides and from there they eventually rejoined U.S. forces . 
 After striking Tulagi , Yorktown rejoined with Lexington , and the two carriers engaged the rest of the Japanese forces involved in the Mo operation from 6 – 8 May in the Battle of the Coral Sea . In the battle , Lexington was sunk and Yorktown was damaged . The Japanese suffered Shōhō sunk , a fleet carrier heavily damaged , and heavy losses to their carrier aircraft and aircrews . Fearing more damaging attacks from Allied land @-@ based aircraft or warships and unable because of their aircraft losses to provide adequate air cover for their naval surface forces , the Japanese turned back from their planned assault on Port Moresby with the intention of trying again later . The next Japanese seaborne attempt to take Port Moresby , however , never happened , mainly because of their navy 's defeat in June at the Battle of Midway . Instead , the Japanese decided to try to take Port Moresby in an ultimately unsuccessful overland attack along the Kokoda Track . The failure to take Port Moresby in May 1942 would have significant and far @-@ reaching strategic implications , many of which involved the small Japanese naval base at Tulagi . 
 Despite the damaging air attacks to their ships and landing forces , the Japanese proceeded with the construction of the naval seaplane base at Tulagi and Gavutu , receiving more shipments of troops and construction workers over the next several months . The base was soon operational with aircraft from the Yokohama Air Group which conducted air reconnaissance patrols throughout the surrounding area beginning on 6 May . On 27 May , the Japanese inspected the Lunga Point area on Guadalcanal as a possible location to build a large airfield . On 13 June , the Naval General Staff approved the construction of an airfield at that location and on 19 June , Admiral Inoue toured the site in anticipation of the airfield construction effort . The next day , Japanese troops began clearing the area of brush , and on 6 July , a 12 @-@ ship convoy delivered 2 @,@ 000 Korean and Japanese construction workers plus 500 Japanese naval combat troops to conduct the airfield construction effort in earnest . The coastwatchers on Guadalcanal and Allied air reconnaissance observed the Japanese airfield construction efforts . Allied Catalinas and B @-@ 17s based at Port Moresby , Efate , Noumea , and Espiritu Santo frequently bombed the Japanese bases on Guadalcanal , Tulagi , and Gavutu over the next several months , but without causing significant damage . Several Japanese float fighters and one Allied bomber were destroyed in aerial combat during the missions . 
 The Allies were greatly concerned about the Japanese airfield construction effort on Guadalcanal because , when completed , the aircraft operating from the airfield would be a significant threat to Allied operations between Australia , New Zealand , and the U.S. The two strategic victories for the Allies in the battles of the Coral Sea and Midway provided an opportunity to take the initiative and launch an offensive against the Japanese somewhere in the Pacific . An Allied plan to attack the southern Solomons was conceived by U.S. Admiral Ernest King , Commander in Chief , United States Fleet . He proposed the offensive to deny the use of the southern Solomon Islands by the Japanese as bases to threaten the supply routes between the U.S. and Australia , and to use them as starting points for a campaign . His goal was to neutralize or capture the major Japanese base at Rabaul while also supporting the Allied New Guinea campaign , with the eventual goal of opening the way for the U.S. to retake the Philippines . U.S. Admiral Chester Nimitz — Allied commander @-@ in chief for Pacific forces — created the South Pacific theater — with U.S. Vice Admiral Robert L. Ghormley in command — to direct the Allied offensive in the Solomons . 
 The failure of the Japanese to take Port Moresby and their defeat at Midway had the effect of leaving their base at Tulagi without effective protection from other Japanese bases . Tulagi was four hours flying time from Rabaul , the nearest large Japanese base . On 7 August 1942 , 11 @,@ 000 U.S. Marines landed on Guadalcanal and 3 @,@ 000 U.S. Marines landed on Tulagi and nearby islands . The Japanese troops on Tulagi and nearby islands were outnumbered and killed almost to the last man in the Battle of Tulagi and Gavutu @-@ Tanambogo while the U.S. Marines on Guadalcanal captured the airfield at Lunga Point without significant resistance . Thus began the Guadalcanal campaign that resulted in a series of large , combined @-@ arms battles between Allied and Japanese forces over the next six months which — along with the New Guinea campaign — would decide the fate of Japanese efforts to secure the southern frontier of their empire in the Pacific . 
 = Jessie Bond = 
 Jessie Bond ( 10 January 1853 – 17 June 1942 ) was an English singer and actress best known for creating the mezzo @-@ soprano soubrette roles in the Gilbert and Sullivan comic operas . She spent twenty years on the stage , the bulk of them with the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company . 
 Musical from an early age , Bond began a concert singing career in Liverpool by 1870 . At the age of 17 , she entered into a brief , unhappy marriage . After leaving her abusive husband , she continued her concert career and studied at the Royal Academy of Music in London with such famous singing teachers as Manuel García . 
 At the age of 25 , in 1878 , Bond began her theatrical career , creating the role of Cousin Hebe in Gilbert and Sullivan 's H.M.S. Pinafore , which became an international success . After this , she created roles of increasing importance with the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company in a series of successful comic operas , including the title role in Iolanthe ( 1882 ) , Pitti Sing in The Mikado ( 1885 ) , Mad Margaret in Ruddigore ( 1887 ) , Phoebe in The Yeomen of the Guard ( 1888 ) , Tessa in The Gondoliers ( 1889 ) and others . 
 During the 1890s , she continued performing in the West End for several more years , while being courted by Lewis Ransome , a civil engineer . In 1897 , at the age of 44 , Bond married Ransome and left the stage . They were happily married for 25 years , moving to Nottinghamshire , where Bond lived the life of a country squire 's wife . She also occasionally gave charity concerts and assisted amateur theatre companies . She survived her husband by twenty years , living to the age of 89 . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 Jessie Charlotte Bond was born in Camden Town , London , the third of five children ( and eldest daughter ) born to John and Elizabeth Bond . John Bond was a <unk> who gave his children a musical education . Bond 's mother often took the children to see theatre . When Jessie Bond was six , her family moved to Liverpool , where she grew up . At the age of eight , she played a Beethoven piano sonata in a concert . To help with family expenses , Bond taught music as a teenager . At the age of sixteen , she began to study singing , which she much preferred to teaching . The same year , at Hope Hall ( now the Everyman Theatre ) in Liverpool , she accompanied the music students of professor <unk> Praeger . The next year , she made her own concert singing debut . 
 Bond 's mother took her to see Ferdinand Alexis Schottlaender ( d . 1885 ) , the director of a choral society in Liverpool , who she hoped would be able to help Bond 's singing career . Schottlaender was ten years older than Bond and had travelled , and the teenaged Bond became fascinated by him , breaking off her previous relationship . Under Schottlaender 's tutelage , Bond 's voice developed rapidly , and she soon became the leading contralto soloist at the Seel Street Benedictine Church ( now known as St. Peter 's Catholic Church ) in the same city . Her father 's enquiries revealed that Schottlaender was a " bad lot " , and he forbade any engagement until Bond was older . 
 On 8 March 1870 , Schottlaender abducted the 17 @-@ year @-@ old Bond on her way to sing at a church service , took her to a friend 's house and forced her to stay the night with him . Schottlaender convinced her that she was " compromised " and that they must marry . The next day , she was taken to Manchester , where they were married . The marriage was a terrible experience for Bond , and she became pregnant and ill . " He ill @-@ treated both my mind and my body , he denied me every comfort , often I had not even enough to eat . To add to my wretchedness , the inevitable baby was coming . ... He had been violently ill @-@ treating me , I was a broken , pitiful creature . " Her family persuaded her to leave him after ten months of marriage . Bond contracted smallpox from the doctor who attended her , but she recovered . The baby , Sidney John Arthur Schottlaender , was born on 7 May 1871 and died on 18 June 1871 , six weeks later . The couple lived separately for several years , and Bond finally divorced her husband in 1874 . Bond stated in her divorce petition that she had been knowingly infected with a communicable disease by her husband . 
 After leaving her husband , Bond continued to teach piano and was immediately back on stage singing oratorios , masses and other concerts near Liverpool . She gave a recital at St. George 's Hall , Liverpool at the end of January 1871 . In November 1871 , Mr and Mrs Howard Paul 's Benefit at the Queen 's Hall , Liverpool , featured J. L. Toole , and " Miss Jessie Bond and Miss Pattie Laverne both sing several new ballads " . She became friendly with the baritone Charles Santley , who advised her to move to London to study at the Royal Academy of Music . Bond did so at the age of 21 , studying with Manuel García and then J. B. Welch , and she continued to sing concerts both in the Provinces and in London . For example , in 1873 , she was the contralto soloist in Mendelssohn 's Elijah in Birkenhead and in Handel 's Messiah in Liverpool . In 1875 at the Liverpool Institute , she sang in J. L. Hatton 's Enchantress , and in the summer of 1877 , she appeared at the Queen 's Theatre in London in at least three of conductor Jules Rivière 's promenade concerts . Impresario Richard D 'Oyly Carte first heard her in a concert at St. George 's Hall and suggested concert engagements for her . 
 = = = H.M.S. Pinafore = = = 
 In May 1878 , Bond made her first appearance on the dramatic stage at the age of 25 , creating the role of Cousin Hebe in W. S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan 's H.M.S. Pinafore . The role had been written for a veteran performer , Mrs Howard Paul . But Gilbert and Sullivan were unhappy with Mrs. Paul 's vocal abilities , which were deteriorating . Finally , with only about a week to go before opening night , Carte hired Bond to play Cousin Hebe . At this stage of her career , Bond was not comfortable with spoken dialogue , and so her character was written out , or given nothing to say , in several scenes . After opening night , however , a portion of the recitative was converted to spoken dialogue , and Bond would have dialogue in all of the remaining roles that she created . She quickly grew to enjoy character acting . 
 In December 1878 , Bond created the part of Maria in After All ! , composed by Alfred Cellier , when that companion piece was added to the bill with Pinafore . In late 1879 , Bond travelled to America with Gilbert , Sullivan and D 'Oyly Carte to give American audiences their first opportunity to see the authentic H.M.S. Pinafore , rather than the pirated versions that had sprung up in American theatres . While in New York City , she created the role of Edith in Gilbert and Sullivan 's next opera , The Pirates of Penzance . This was followed by a US tour of Pinafore and Pirates . Just before the American tour , Bond had developed an abscess in her leg . This never fully healed and would be with her throughout her stage career . In her autobiography , she wrote : 
 The abscess in my ankle was painful and persistent .... Owing to faulty treatment and want of rest my ankle became perfectly stiff , as it is to this day . Of course , I said as little as possible about it , for even partial lameness would spoil my chances on the stage . I doubt if the management ever knew ; the public certainly didn 't ; and those who saw me dancing and <unk> light @-@ heartedly about the stage for twenty years little thought under what difficulties I did it , and the pain I often suffered . 
 In fact , the management knew about Bond 's abscess , since Sullivan 's diary records that both he and Gilbert visited her during her temporary incapacity , and Sullivan paid the doctor 's bill . 
 = = = Pirates through Iolanthe = = = 
 Back in London , Bond continued to play Edith until Pirates ran its course in April 1881 . One of Bond 's sisters , Neva Bond , became a D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company chorister for approximately twelve years , from 1880 to 1891 . Neva created the role of Isabel in the London production of The Pirates of Penzance . 
 Bond , already ambitious , asked Gilbert if he might be able to increase the size of her role . Gilbert tried to mollify her in a letter , concluding , " I am writing such a particularly good part for you in the new piece that I should be distressed beyond measure if you should leave us . I 've never said as much as this to any actor or actress before . I don 't say it to induce you to play so insignificant a part as Edith , for if you left us now , and came back to us to play that part , I should be satisfied . But if you didn 't play it , my calculations would be all upset , and I should lose a dear little lady for whom I have always had a very special regard . " True to Gilbert 's word , Edith was followed by a string of roles of increasing importance . First was Lady Angela in Patience ( 1881 – 82 ) . Bond did not much like the role , writing later that she did not relate to the sentimental lady of luxury indulging in the aesthetic craze . At the same time , Bond was becoming known to theatregoers and attracting the attention of young men . Having had such bad experiences with romance in the past , Bond ignored such attentions . One poem sent to her by an admirer ran in mock @-@ Gilbertian style as follows ( in part ) : 
 <unk> 'er I chance / A backward glance , / At times when , off my filbert 
 With you ( my " mash ! " ) , / I blew my cash / On Sullivan and Gilbert ! 
 I loved you then / With all my pen / ( My heart 's amanuensis ) , 
 And folks who read / Sat up and said / " His love for her immense is ! " 
 Nor were they wrong ; / Your merry song — / You sing divinely , sweetly ! 
 Your lively dance / And roguish glance / Had captured me completely ! 
 I don 't complain ! / I 'd still remain / A pris <unk> now and ever ! 
 From such a Bond / ' Tis far beyond / My humble wish to sever ! 
 Now , pray don 't scold , / I know I 'm bold , / But , still , I 'm not a sinner . For , 
 Remember this , / I 've known you , miss , / Since you were in a Pinafore ! 
 After the company had moved into the new Savoy Theatre , Bond met the Prince of Wales on several occasions , who assisted her career , securing singing engagements for her . 
 Bond wrote of her next role , " It was like a dream come true when I saw my own name in the title role " of Iolanthe ( 1882 – 84 ) . Bond 's first entrance as Iolanthe was across a " stream " . She wrote in her memoirs about a performance of Iolanthe : " Realism can be carried too far , as it was when one night a zealous property man said to me : ' It 'll be just like the real thing to @-@ night , Miss Bond . I 've put some frogs into the water ! ' ' Then you 'll just have to fish them out again , ' I retorted , ' and the curtain won 't go up until you do . ' They had to catch those frogs in an inverted umbrella . Everybody got splashed and agitated , and the performance was delayed for some time . " The critics praised Bond 's portrayal of the title character : " Miss Jessie Bond ... may be credited with all the grace , delicacy , and fascination we should expect from a fairy mother , and her singing of the really exquisite melody in the last scene was one of the most successful items in the entire opera . " 
 Iolanthe was followed by Princess Ida ( 1884 ) , in which Bond played the role of Melissa . Bond played the role of Constance in the first revival of The Sorcerer ( 1884 – 85 ) . The role had originally been written for a soprano , and some of the music was transposed down to suit Bond 's lower range and tessitura . Another feature of this revival was the pairing of Bond 's character with that of Rutland Barrington 's . The combination was so successful that in later Savoy operas , Bond and Barrington were generally paired together . 
 = = = The Mikado and Ruddigore = = = 
 Bond next created the role of Pitti @-@ Sing in The Mikado ( 1885 – 87 ) , one of the " three little maids from school . " Sometimes , inspiration for plot points in the Gilbert and Sullivan operas was provided by characteristics of the performers themselves . For instance , Gilbert noted in an interview that the fact that the female singers to be engaged for The Mikado , Leonora Braham , Bond , and Sybil Grey , were all of short stature inspired him to make them schoolgirls — three " little " maids — and to treat them as a closely linked trio throughout the work as much as possible . Bond , however , knew how to stand out on stage . During preparations for The Mikado , she persuaded the wardrobe mistress to make the obi of her costume twice as big as that of the other " little maids " . She wrote : " I made the most of my big , big bow , turning my back to the audience whenever I got a chance , and waggling it . The gallery was delighted , but I nearly got the sack for that prank ! However , I did get noticed , which was what I wanted . " 
 After seven years with D 'Oyly Carte , and still earning money from private and concert singing engagements , Bond 's salary had risen to the point where she was able to move into a better flat and hire a maid . Though she was happy with her success , Bond ( somewhat like Sullivan ) longed to devote herself to singing serious music . She wrote that when she was in a thoughtful mood , she would consider the following : 
 I had worked so hard at serious music , I had loved it so much and been so successful , that it was not without a pang that I gave it all up to sing little songs and choruses that were , after all , child 's play to me . ... [ O ] <unk> my heart ached when I thought of those days when I lived in an atmosphere of music of the highest order , and could express my inmost self in it . ... [ S ] ometimes when I thought things over I felt how far I had fallen from that first austere ideal , and wished that fame and success could have come in a higher sphere . 
 During the run of The Mikado , Bond met Lewis Ransome , a young civil engineer from a wealthy Quaker family . He had just returned from America , and the two compared travel experiences . Ransome admitted to Bond that , after watching The Mikado , he had mentioned to his sister that he " liked the little one with the big sash best . So next day when she saw a photograph of you in a shop window she went in and bought it . She gave it to me and I have it now . " Thus , despite Bond 's aversion to romance , began a long friendship that led , twelve years later , to Bond 's second marriage . Ransome , several years younger than Bond , proposed marriage on many occasions over the course of the relationship , but Bond told him that she would not marry while she continued on the stage . Over the years , the two spent many of Bond 's days off ( Sundays ) relaxing together in the country . 
 Bond next created the role of Mad Margaret in Ruddigore ( 1887 ; originally spelt " Ruddygore " ) , which she regarded as her favourite of all the Gilbert and Sullivan roles , " for it gave me the chance to show what I really could do as an actress . " The part was her largest to date , and Gilbert , Sullivan and Carte made her audition it for them to be sure that she could handle the responsibility . " It was an awful ordeal . I saw the three white faces looming out of the darkness as they sat close together ; criticizing me , talking me over , with cold managerial detachment . It nearly killed me . Perhaps it gave an added realism and abandon to my simulated madness , for indeed I was nearly mad with fear – but at any rate I came through triumphantly , they were all three of them delighted . " Bond was particularly nervous on opening night . " I shook and <unk> so much that Mad Margaret 's staff was no mere adjunct , but an absolute necessity . Without it I should have fallen as I stood in the wings waiting to go on . Then some one gave me a push ; I was there , on the stage , in the glare of the footlights , hundreds of eyes fixed on me , tier upon tier of dim white faces rising from floor to ceiling in the gloom . It was enough ; I forgot myself , I was Mad Margaret and no one else . I made an immense success . " Cellier and Bridgeman seconded this assessment : 
 There were two particularly noteworthy features in the performance of ' Ruddigore . ' First to be mentioned was the acting of Miss Jessie Bond in the part of ' Mad Margaret . ' Among the host of her admirers few had given the popular Savoy soubrette credit for such great ability as a genuine comedy @-@ actress , for never before had the opportunity been afforded her to display her latent talent — Jessie Bond 's triumph came as a surprise to all .... So true to real life was the portrayal of Mad Margaret that Mr. Forbes Winslow , the famous authority on mental disorders , wrote a congratulatory letter to Miss Bond and inquired where she had found the model from which she had studied , and so faithfully copied the phases of insanity . No greater compliment could have been paid the actress . 
 Bond next appeared in the first revivals of H.M.S. Pinafore ( 1887 – 88 ) , Pirates ( 1888 ) , and The Mikado ( 1888 ) recreating her earlier roles . She had developed an enthusiastic following among the audiences at the Savoy Theatre . Between Savoy shows , Bond was able to appear in To the Death by fellow <unk> Rutland Barrington ( 1888 ) and Locked In ( 1889 ) . 
 = = = Yeomen and The Gondoliers = = = 
 After this , Bond 's next role was Phœbe <unk> in The Yeomen of the Guard ( 1888 – 89 ) . Of this role , Bond wrote , " My share in the most beautiful of all the Gilbert and Sullivan operas was delightfully easy and natural . When Gilbert gave it to me at the first reading he said , ' Here you are , Jessie , you needn 't act this , it 's you . ' " Gilbert was even more nervous than usual on the first night of Yeomen and came backstage to give his best wishes to the cast . Bond wrote , " I am afraid he made himself a perfect nuisance behind the scenes , and did his best , poor fellow , to upset us all . These first nights were very hard on me ... and nearly always my understudy was called upon to officiate on the second night of a play , while I lay exhausted in my bed . [ In Yeomen ] , the curtain rises on Phœbe alone at her spinning wheel , and Gilbert kept fussing about ... until I was almost as demented as he was . At last I turned on him savagely . ' For Heaven 's sake , Mr. Gilbert , go away and leave me alone , or I shan 't be able to sing a note ! ' He gave me a final frenzied hug , and vanished . " 
 In each of the new Gilbert and Sullivan operas , Bond 's roles continued to grow larger and more challenging , until with Margaret , Phœbe , and Tessa in The Gondoliers ( 1889 – 91 ) , Bond 's roles were at least as important as any other female role . By the time The Gondoliers was in preparation , Gilbert felt that his regular principal cast members were becoming too demanding and that the precision and style of D 'Oyly Carte productions could be maintained only if there were no " stars " . He endeavoured to make the nine leading roles as co @-@ equal as he could . Bond , aware of her importance to the company , declined to appear unless her salary was raised from twenty pounds to thirty pounds a week . Gilbert bitterly resisted the raise , but Bond prevailed . 
 I was the only one who asked for a rise , and Gilbert was furious with me . All the time we were rehearsing [ The Gondoliers ] he never spoke to me , and only acknowledged my existence by sometimes saying <unk> : ' Make way for the High @-@ Salaried Artiste ! ' ... Passing storms like this did occasionally ruffle the course of our friendship , but on the whole it flowed on deep and strong . 
 During the run of The Gondoliers , Queen Victoria called for a royal command performance of the show at Windsor Castle . Bond wrote , 
 I <unk> a little as we began our quartet ' A Right @-@ down Regular Royal Queen . ' But [ this and Barrington 's solo ] numbers seemed to amuse the real Queen more than anything else in the opera , and , indeed , who could so well as she see the point of them ? The very fact of her choosing this opera from all the others to be played before her shows how vivid was her sense of fun , and how truly British was her willingness to laugh at herself . There was ... only one encore ... [ a ] nd who do you suppose was singled out for that honour ? Who but I who write this , little Jessie Bond ... for my song in the first act , ' When a Merry Maiden <unk> 
 = = = Last years on stage = = = 
 After The Gondoliers closed , Gilbert and Sullivan were estranged for a time , and Carte hired Bond to play Chinna @-@ <unk> in Dance , Desprez , and Solomon 's The Nautch Girl ( 1891 ) . Although her salary continued to rise , she was less happy at the Savoy after Gilbert 's departure . She took a three @-@ month leave from the D 'Oyly Carte organisation in August 1891 , together with Rutland Barrington , performing a series of " musical <unk> " and sketches , written mostly by Barrington and composed by Edward Solomon , on a provincial tour , where they received good notices and profits . Bond also did some of the writing . She had passed up the opportunity to create a role in Gilbert 's next opera , The Mountebanks at the Lyric Theatre ( 1892 ) , as she was still under contract to Carte . She and Barrington returned to the Savoy in November , but Bond left the D 'Oyly Carte organisation at the end of the run of The Nautch Girl in January 1892 , as there was no role for her in the next Savoy opera , The Vicar of Bray . Bond was unwilling to accept the part offered to her in the next Savoy piece , Haddon Hall ( 1892 ) . 
 Over the next few years , Bond had several engagements in London theatres , including in Ma Mie Rosette ( 1892 ) by Ivan Caryll , Poor Jonathan ( 1893 ) , Corney <unk> ( 1893 ) , a revival of Pickwick by Solomon and F. C. Burnand ( 1893 ) Miami ( as Nelly O 'Neil ) at the Princess 's Theatre , and others . She enjoyed good runs as Helen <unk> in the musical comedy Go @-@ Bang ( 1894 ) and Nanna in Gilbert and F. Osmond Carr 's His Excellency ( 1894 – 95 ) . In 1894 , she also played in Wapping Old Stairs , by Stuart Robertson and Howard Talbot ( with Courtice Pounds and Richard Temple ) , and Pick @-@ me @-@ up at the Trafalgar Square Theatre ( with George Grossmith , Jr. and Letty Lind ) . During these years , Bond owned a fox terrier named Bob . She returned to the Savoy to play Pitti @-@ Sing in the revivals of The Mikado that ran off and on from November 1895 to February 1897 . When the revivals were over , Bond left the stage . 
 After he had first seen her perform in The Mikado in 1885 , Bond 's friendship with Lewis Ransome continued and deepened . Subject to an increasing number of short illnesses that prevented her from performing , and tiring of life in the theatre , Bond finally agreed to marry Ransome , and the couple wed in May 1897 . 
 When I told Gilbert he was so angry that I don 't think he ever quite forgave me ; he would not accept my health as an excuse , he was unreasonable , as , alas , he often was ! ' You are a little fool ! ' he said . ' I have often heard you say you don 't like old women , ' I retorted . ' I shall soon be old . Will you provide for me ? Will Sir Arthur ? Will Carte ? No , of course you won 't . Well , I am going to marry a man who <unk> 
 Bond wrote of her feelings at the end of her last performance : 
 Twenty years of hard work , twenty years of fun and frolic and jolly companionship , twenty years of living in an atmosphere of tuneful nonsense , with the glare of the footlights in my eyes and the thunders of applause in my ears . How terribly I should miss it all ! And domesticity , that all my life I had fled from , had caught me at last . 
 Bond and Ransome spent three years in London , where Bond entertained her neighbours and theatrical friends with musical soirees and dinner parties . She also participated in charity benefits , such as a performance of H.M.S. Pinafore for the benefit of the families of soldiers and sailors , on 6 January 1900 , in the village of Maiden Bradley . In 1900 , the lease on Ransome 's family business ( Ransome and Co . , later Ransome & Marles , a manufacturer of bearings and wood @-@ working machinery ) ran out , and it relocated to Newark , Nottinghamshire , to reduce costs . Bond and Ransome moved near the new factory to a large house in Farndon . Gilbert wrote to her that " The Savoy is not the same without you . " 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 Although Bond 's life as a performer in the theatre had ended at age 44 , she occasionally gave charity concerts thereafter . Unlike Bond 's first marriage , her second was a happy one . Initially reluctant to leave London , Bond reported , " We entertained a good deal , and gave hunt lunches and shooting parties of our own , so my time was well filled up , and I missed London less than I could have believed . " She founded and directed the Newark Amateur Dramatic Society , an amateur dramatic club , whose performances supported local charities . The couple also often visited London and did some travelling abroad . 
 In 1912 , and for some years afterwards , Bond played a significant role in developing the career of Donald Wolfit , whom she first saw perform when he was ten years old . Her first action on his behalf was to advise his concerned parents not to try to prevent him from pursuing a career on the stage . Together with George Power , Leonora Braham and Julia Gwynne , she was one of four artistes of the original D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company who attended a reunion at the Savoy Hotel in 1914 ( see photograph below ) . The four then posed for a group photograph beside the Sullivan monument in the Victoria Embankment Gardens . Her husband died in May 1922 , after 25 years of marriage . Two years later , Bond moved out of the large house to Newark and later to Worthing , Sussex , and often visited London . 
 In the 1920s , Bond wrote several articles about her memories of Gilbert and Sullivan and her years with the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company for The Strand Magazine and The Gilbert & Sullivan Journal . Her autobiography , The Life and Reminiscences of Jessie Bond , the Old Savoyard , was published in 1930 . In that book , she expressed great admiration particularly for Gilbert , but also for Sullivan and D 'Oyly Carte , and she bemoaned overacting by performers in the " modern " era . In March 1930 , the Gilbert and Sullivan Society invited the original three little maids to a reunion in London to celebrate the 45th anniversary of The Mikado . 
 In her last years , Bond entertained wounded World War I servicemen , playing the piano and singing at a south coast home for disabled soldiers and sailors . An obituary in The Evening Standard reported : " Every day for more than a year , until just recently , she was taken out in her wheelchair . After a breath of sea air ... she would always go into her favourite hotel for a drink and would often sit down at the piano and entertain the company with some of her old Gilbert and Sullivan tunes . She often used to go to a home for wounded ex @-@ servicemen of the last war [ and ] would give an impromptu entertainment , playing and singing her old songs . She liked to go to parties and would always play and sing . " The Worthing Gazette stated that Bond continued to be much loved in her later years , and people came to see her from all over Britain to pay homage in her old age . The Worthing Herald wrote : " Despite her great age , Miss Bond preserved a quick and active mind , and hated to be fussed over . " 
 She died in 1942 at age 89 in Worthing . 
 = House of the Rising Sun ( Lost ) = 
 " House of the Rising Sun " is the sixth episode of the first season of the American television series Lost . It centers on Jin @-@ Soo Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) , who brutally attacks Michael Dawson ( Harold Perrineau ) ; the survivors do not know why since Jin and his wife Sun @-@ Hwa Kwon ( Yunjin Kim ) only speak Korean . Meanwhile , Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) proposes that the survivors move to the caves from the beach . The episode was the first to feature the backstory of Sun and Jin , and the former is shown in the episode 's flashbacks . It was directed by Michael Zinberg and written by Javier Grillo @-@ Marxuach . 
 After being cast , Yunjin Kim and Daniel Dae Kim were nervous that their characters ' relationship would foster negative perceptions of Korean people ; the former felt that it was an outdated depiction which would influence a society little exposed to Korean culture . The actors discussed this with the series ' producers , leading to the writing of " House of the Rising Sun " and the multifaceted depiction of their relationship . " House of the Rising Sun " first aired on October 27 , 2004 , on the American network ABC . An estimated 16 @.@ 83 million viewers watched the episode on its first broadcast , and it earned a ratings share of 6 @.@ 4 / 17 , a slight increase from the previous episode . It received mainly positive reviews , with critics focusing on the revelations surrounding Jin and Sun 's relationship . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 Sun is at a party , and is served champagne by a waiter , Jin . They soon develop a relationship , with Sun wanting to run away with Jin to America , but Jin insisting they honorably tell her father that they are seeing each other . Sun 's father approves of their relationship as long as Jin takes a job working for him . One night after they 're married , Jin returns home covered in someone else 's blood . Sun is angry that he refuses to explain the blood to her and slaps him . He tells Sun that he does whatever her father tells him to do . A few years later , Sun secretly plots to leave Jin and her father , so she will be free to go wherever she wants . However , she does not go through with her plans after he expresses a loving gesture to her , and boards Flight 815 with her husband . 
 = = = On the Island = = = 
 It is Day 7 , September 28 , 2004 , and Jack Shephard , Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) , Charlie Pace ( Dominic Monaghan ) and John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) go to the caves to gather water and investigate . Charlie steps on a beehive , and is told not to move by Locke or else the hive will snap . Charlie slaps at a bee on his face and shifts weight , causing the hive to snap and everyone to get stung . Locke and Charlie are clearing the wreckage at the caves and Locke tells Charlie that he recognizes him from a band Charlie is in , Drive Shaft . Charlie is happy that finally someone , other than Kate , is familiar with his musical background . Later , at the caves the team discovers two bodies , according to Jack a man and a woman , whom Locke dubs " Adam and Eve " . From the deterioration of their clothes Jack estimates that they have been dead for at least 40 – 50 years , and finds a pouch on them containing two stones : one black , one white . 
 Meanwhile , Sun is shocked to see Jin attack Michael on the beach for no apparent reason . James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) and Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) manage to subdue and handcuff Jin to the wreckage . Michael says the attack was racially motivated , which he later tells his son , Walt Lloyd ( Malcolm David Kelley ) , is not true . Sun finds Michael alone , and in perfect , unbroken English says , " I need to talk to you . " Michael is shocked that she speaks English . Sun tells him that Jin is unaware of this , and explains that Jin angrily attacked Michael because of the watch he 's wearing , which belongs to her father . Michael says he just found it in the wreckage and it 's nothing important . 
 Jack and Kate return to the beach and Jack starts talking to people about moving to the caves . The castaways argue whether to stay on the beach where a rescue party could see them ( and keep the signal fire burning ) , or move to the caves , where there is more shelter and fresh water . The group splits into two camps accordingly : Jack , Locke , Charlie , Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) , Jin , Sun , Ethan Rom ( William Mapother ) , Dr. Leslie Arzt ( Daniel Roebuck ) , Doug , and Sullivan ( Scott Paulin ) move to the caves while Kate , Sawyer , Sayid , Claire Littleton ( Emilie de Ravin ) , Michael Dawson ( Harold Perrineau ) , Walt , Vincent ( Madison ) , Shannon Rutherford ( Maggie Grace ) , Boone Carlyle ( Ian Somerhalder ) , Rose Nadler ( L. Scott Caldwell ) , Scott Jackson ( Christian Bowman ) , and Steve Jenkins ( Dustin Watchman ) remain on the beach . 
 At the caves , Locke tells Charlie that he knows Charlie is addicted to heroin . Locke says if Charlie gives up his drugs , the island will give him his guitar , which he misses deeply . Charlie hands over the heroin , Locke shows him where the guitar is , and Charlie is ecstatic . On the beach , Kate refuses to go with Jack to the caves . Michael menacingly approaches Jin with an axe , throws the watch at him , and shouts that the fight over the watch " is ridiculous , because time doesn 't matter on a damn island . " As Michael cuts Jin free of his handcuffs , one of the cuffs remains on his wrist , and Michael tells Jin to stay away from him and Walt . That night at the caves , Charlie plays his guitar as Jack returns with people from the beach . The episode ends with clips of the two groups , while Willie Nelson 's ' Are You Sure ' plays in the background . 
 = = Production = = 
 Both Yunjin Kim and Daniel Dae Kim were born in Korea but raised in the United States . Yunjin Kim initially auditioned for the role of Kate , but the producers liked her so much that they created an entirely new character , part of " a couple [ that 's ] alienated from the rest of the group because they can 't communicate . " A male Korean actor was sought out as Kim 's co @-@ star , with Dae Kim winning the part . He had moved from South Korea as a toddler and forgotten most of his Korean by the time he won the role of Jin ; while Kim helped him with the language , his accent reportedly sounded poor to native speakers . 
 The episode title is a reference to the song " The House of the Rising Sun " , popularized by English rock group The Animals in 1964 . It was the first episode to reveal the backstory of Sun and Jin , with the former being the focus of the episode 's flashbacks . Yunjin Kim felt the initial way in which Sun and Jin were portrayed represented an " outdated " depiction of a Korean relationship ; she and others in the Korean community worried that this would affect perceptions of Koreans , due to that race 's lack of exposure in the American media . The two actors discussed " potentially negative feedback " with the producers early in the series ' development , and Yunjin Kim 's fear led co @-@ creator J.J. Abrams to ensure her character 's story would be told . 
 Supervising producer Javier Grillo @-@ Marxuach , who wrote " House of the Rising Sun " , found it difficult to write the Jin @-@ Sun storyline , as he did not speak Korean and had to get into a " cultural headspace " for which he had no personal reference . Showrunner Damon Lindelof commented that given the script was written in English , only during the dailies the producers noticed that almost all of the episode would be subtitled , making them fear for ABC 's reaction . Instead the network executives received it well , only being concerned about " the complex inherent racial dynamics in the story where a Korean man was attacking a black man " . From Dae Kim 's perspective , Jin crashed on the island only to find himself in a " worst @-@ case scenario " – he is " among a bunch of strangers , he doesn 't speak any English , and he 's suspicious of people already . " Kim thought it was important to convey Sun and Jin 's first falling in love before showing their alienation from the other . 
 Grillo @-@ Marxuach stressed the importance of the episode due to the discovery of the caves , which prompts the survivors to become " full @-@ time dwellers of the island . " Referring to the episode 's Jin @-@ Sun and Locke @-@ Charlie storylines , Grillo @-@ Marxuach felt that the island was about being " forced to confront your inner demons [ and ] work out things " never addressed before . Charlie 's fear of bees is based on Grillo @-@ Marxuach 's life experience . Despite the character 's phobia , Monaghan enjoyed working with the bees . The ones used in the episode were male drones , which meant they lacked stingers and were docile enough to easily handle . Monaghan 's head and arms were covered in sticky honey to encourage the bees to land and stay on him during filming . To simulate Jack and Kate 's escape from the bees , the special effects team created " CG bees " and then added them in post @-@ production . Michael Zinberg directed and Sora Jung guest starred . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " House of the Rising Sun " first aired in the United States on October 27 , 2004 . An estimated 16 @.@ 83 million U.S. viewers watched the episode 's premiere , and it earned a ratings share of 6 @.@ 4 / 17 , a slight increase from the previous episode . " House of the Rising Sun " finished in thirteenth place for the week among all the major networks . 
 The episode has received mostly positive reviews . In her 2006 work Finding Lost : The Unofficial Guide , Nikki Stafford called it " an excellent episode , with a beautiful , mournful musical score . " Robert Dougherty , author of the 2008 book Lost Episode Guide for Others : An Unofficial Anthology , deemed the " smaller , character driven " episode a " must see " . He cited its showcase of Yunjin Kim and the revelations surrounding Jin and Sun 's relationship , though Dougherty admitted some viewers might have found these minor characters uninteresting . 
 In 2008 , Dan Snierson of Entertainment Weekly graded the episode with an A − . He described the main Jin @-@ Sun storyline as " delicate and gripping , " and believed Sun 's eventual decision to stay with her husband was as " intriguing " as the revelation that she could speak English . Snierson also praised the episode 's humor and tension between the castaways ' " we 're @-@ gonna @-@ be @-@ rescued @-@ any @-@ <unk> versus @-@ we 're @-@ gonna @-@ be @-@ here @-@ for @-@ awhile " mentalities . 
 Chris Carabott , writing for IGN in 2008 , rated " House of the Rising Sun " with an 8 out of 10 – an indication of a " great " episode . He felt that Jin 's situation deserved sympathy and was good fodder for future storylines , and also was pleased that the language barrier was somewhat resolved so early in the series with Sun 's ability to speak English . On a list ranking all the Lost episodes ( except the finale ) , the Los Angeles Times ranked " House of the Rising Sun " 44 out of 110 episodes , explaining : " <unk> title aside , this first look into the Sun and Jin marriage proved the show was willing to try all kinds of different stories to be a success . " " House of the Rising Sun " , along with " Pilot " and " The Moth " , won a PRISM Award for Charlie 's drug storyline . 
 = Arctic Monkeys = 
 Arctic Monkeys are an English rock band formed in 2002 in High Green , a suburb of Sheffield . The band consists of Alex Turner ( lead vocals , rhythm guitar , lead guitar ) , Matt Helders ( drums , vocals ) , Jamie Cook ( lead guitar , rhythm guitar , piano ) and Nick O 'Malley ( bass , backing vocals ) . Former band member Andy Nicholson ( bass guitar , backing vocals ) left the band in 2006 shortly after their debut album was released . 
 They have released five studio albums : Whatever People Say I Am , That 's What I 'm Not ( 2006 ) , Favourite Worst Nightmare ( 2007 ) , Humbug ( 2009 ) , Suck It and See ( 2011 ) and AM ( 2013 ) , as well as one live album , At the Apollo ( 2008 ) . Their debut album is the fastest @-@ selling debut album by a band in British chart history , and in 2013 , Rolling Stone ranked it the 30th @-@ greatest debut album of all time . 
 The band has won seven Brit Awards — winning both Best British Group and Best British Album three times , and have been nominated for three Grammy Awards . They also won the Mercury Prize in 2006 for their debut album , in addition to receiving nominations in 2007 and 2013 . The band have headlined at the Glastonbury Festival twice , in 2007 and again in 2013 . 
 Arctic Monkeys were heralded as one of the first bands to come to public attention via the Internet , with commentators suggesting they represented the possibility of a change in the way in which new bands are promoted and marketed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years and record deal ( 2003 – 05 ) = = = 
 The band began rehearsing at Yellow Arch Studios in <unk> , and played its first gig on 13 June 2003 at The Grapes in Sheffield city centre . After a few performances in 2003 , the band began to record demos at <unk> studios in Sheffield . 18 songs were demoed in all and the collection , now known as Beneath the Boardwalk , was burned on to CDs to give away at gigs , which were promptly file @-@ shared amongst fans . The name Beneath the Boardwalk originated when the first batch of demos were sent around . The first sender , wanting to classify the demos , named them after where he received them , the Boardwalk . Slowly , as more demos were spread , they were all classified under this name . This has led to many people falsely believing that Beneath the Boardwalk was an early album , or that the early demos were all released under this title . The group did not mind the distribution , saying " we never made those demos to make money or anything . We were giving them away free anyway – that was a better way for people to hear them . " When asked about the popularity of the band 's MySpace site in an interview with Prefix Magazine , the band said that they were unaware what it was , and that the site had originally been created by their fans . 
 The band began to grow in popularity across the north of England , receiving attention from BBC Radio and the British tabloid press . A local amateur photographer , Mark Bull , filmed the band 's performances and made the music video " Fake Tales of San Francisco " , releasing it on his website , alongside the contents of Beneath the Boardwalk – a collection of the band 's songs which he named after a local music venue . In May 2005 , Arctic Monkeys released their first single , Five Minutes with Arctic Monkeys on their own ' Bang Bang ' label , featuring the songs " Fake Tales of San Francisco " and " From the Ritz to the Rubble " . This release was limited to 500 CDs and 1 @,@ 000 7 " records , but was also available to download from the iTunes Music Store . Soon after , the band played at the Carling Stage of the Reading and Leeds Festivals , reserved for less known or unsigned bands . Their appearance was hyped by much of the music press and the band was watched by an unusually large crowd . 
 Eventually , they were signed to Domino in June 2005 . The band said they were attracted to the DIY ethic of Domino owner Laurence Bell , who ran the label from his flat and only signed bands that he liked personally . The UK 's Daily Star reported that this was followed in October by a £ 1 million publishing deal with EMI and a £ 725 @,@ 000 contract with Epic Records for the United States . Arctic Monkeys denied this on their website , dubbing the newspaper " The Daily Stir " . However , Domino had licensed the Australian and New Zealand publishing rights to EMI and the Japanese rights to independent label Hostess . Their first single with Domino , " I Bet You Look Good on the Dancefloor " , which was recorded at Chapel Studios in Lincolnshire , was released on 17 October 2005 and went straight to No. 1 on the UK Singles Chart , beating Sugababes and Robbie Williams . Two weeks previous to this , it made its first appearance on the cover of NME . Their second single , " When the Sun Goes Down " ( previously titled " <unk> " ) , released on 16 January 2006 , also went straight to No. 1 on the UK Singles Chart , selling 38 @,@ 922 copies and taking over that position from Shayne Ward . The band 's success with little marketing or advertising led some to suggest that it could signal a change in how new bands achieve recognition . 
 = = = Whatever People Say I Am , That 's What I 'm Not ( 2006 ) = = = 
 The band finished recording their debut album , Whatever People Say I Am , That 's What I 'm Not , at Chapel Studios in Lincolnshire in September 2005 with Jim Abbiss producing . Whatever People Say I Am , That 's What I 'm Not became the fastest selling debut album in UK chart history , selling 363 @,@ 735 copies in the first week . This smashed the previous record of 306 @,@ 631 copies held by Popstars by Hear 'Say , and sold more copies on its first day alone – 118 @,@ 501 – than the rest of the Top 20 albums combined . The cover sleeve of Whatever People Say I Am , That 's What I 'm Not , showing Chris McClure , a friend of the band smoking a cigarette , was criticised by the head of the NHS in Scotland for " reinforcing the idea that smoking is OK " . The image on the CD itself is a shot of an ashtray full of cigarettes . The band 's product manager denied the accusation , and suggested the opposite – " You can see from the image smoking is not doing him the world of good . " 
 The record was released a month later in the US on 21 February 2006 and entered at No. 24 on the Billboard album chart after it sold 34 @,@ 000 units in its first week , making it the second fastest selling for a debut indie rock album in America . However , US sales for the first year did not match those of the first week in the UK for the album . US critics were more reserved about the band than their UK counterparts , and appeared unwilling to be drawn into the possibility of " yet another example of the UK 's press over @-@ hyping new bands " . However , the band 's June 2006 tour of North America received critical acclaim at each stop – the hype surrounding them " proven to exist for good reason " . Meanwhile , the UK 's NME magazine declared the band 's debut album the " 5th greatest British album of all time " . It also equalled the record of The Strokes and Oasis at the 2006 NME Awards , winning three fan @-@ voted awards for Best British Band , Best New Band and Best Track for " I Bet You Look Good on the Dancefloor " . 
 Arctic Monkeys wasted no time in recording new material , and released a five @-@ track EP on 24 April 2006 , titled Who the Fuck Are Arctic Monkeys ? . Due to its length , the EP was ineligible to chart as a UK single or album . Furthermore , the record 's graphic language has resulted in significantly less radio airplay than previous records , although this was not a reported concern according to an insider – " since they made their name on the Internet ... they don 't care if they don 't get radio play " . The release of the EP Who the Fuck Are Arctic Monkeys ? just three months after their record @-@ breaking debut album has been criticised by some , who have seen it as " money @-@ grabbing " and " cashing in on their success " . The band countered that it regularly releases new music not to make money , but to avoid the " boredom " of " spending three years touring on one album " . 
 Soon after the release of the EP in the UK , the band announced that Andy Nicholson would not take part in the band 's forthcoming North America tour due to fatigue from " an intensive period of touring " . On returning to the UK , Nicholson confirmed that he would leave Arctic Monkeys and start his own project . He also said that he couldn 't deal with the band 's fame and the success over the previous six months . In a statement on their official website , the band said : " We are sad to tell everyone that Andy is no longer with the band " , also confirmed that Nick O 'Malley – former bassist with The Dodgems who had drafted in as temporary bassist for the tour – would continue as bassist for the rest of their summer tour schedule . Shortly after , Nick O 'Malley was confirmed as the formal replacement for Nicholson . 
 Arctic Monkeys ' first release without Nicholson , the single " Leave Before the Lights Come On " , came on 14 August 2006 . Turner said that the song was one of the last songs he wrote before their rise to fame , and suggested that " it feels very much like it could be on the album " . Peaking at No. 4 in the UK , the single became the band 's first failure to reach No. 1 . The band was re @-@ united at the Leeds Festival when Nicholson met up with his former band mates and his replacement bassist , O 'Malley . Only the original band members , minus Nicholson , were present at the award ceremony when Whatever People Say I Am , That 's What I 'm Not won the 2006 Mercury Prize two weeks later . 
 = = = Favourite Worst Nightmare ( 2007 ) = = = 
 The band 's second album , Favourite Worst Nightmare , was released on 23 April 2007 , a week after the release of accompanying single " <unk> " . Like its predecessor , Favourite Worst Nightmare also quickly reached No. 1 in the album charts . Turner described the songs as " very different from last time " , adding that the sound of some tracks are " a bit full @-@ on – a bit like " From the Ritz to the Rubble " , " The View from the Afternoon " , that sort of thing . " A secret gig played at Sheffield 's <unk> on 10 February 2007 , debuted seven new songs ( six from Favourite Worst Nightmare and one other ) . Early reviews of the release were positive , and described it as " very , very fast and very , very loud . " 
 Meanwhile , the band continued to pick up awards from around the world , namely the ' Best New Artist in the United States ' at the PLUG Independent Music Awards , the " Album of the Year " awards in Japan , Ireland and the US , awards for " Best Album " and " Best Music DVD " for the short film " <unk> Man " at the 2007 NME Awards . It ended the year by clinching the " Best British Band " and " Best British Album " at the 2008 BRIT Awards . For the second year in a row , the band was nominated for the annual Mercury Prize , although it failed to match its feat of 2006 after the award went to Klaxons ' Myths of the Near Future . 
 On 29 April 2007 , the day Favourite Worst Nightmare charted at No. 1 in the UK Albums Chart , all 12 tracks from the album charted in the Top 200 of the UK Singles Chart . On 27 April 2007 it had a total of 18 tracks in the Top 200 . " Fluorescent Adolescent " and " 505 " charted in the Top 75 , at No. 60 and No. 74 respectively . The band later released " Fluorescent Adolescent " as a single , and it charted at No. 5 , after debuting the song live on The Jonathan Ross Show . 
 The third single from Favourite Worst Nightmare , " Teddy Picker " , was released on 3 December 2007 . It charted at No. 20 and remained only one week in the top 40 staying in this position , making it the lowest charting single for the band so far . Prior to this release the band released an extremely limited number of 250 vinyl under the pseudonym The Death Ramps containing two of the b @-@ sides from the " Teddy Picker " single . 
 Arctic Monkeys headlined the Glastonbury Festival on 22 June 2007 , the highlights of which were aired on BBC2 . During their headline act , the band performed with Dizzee Rascal and Simian Mobile Disco and covered Shirley Bassey 's " Diamonds Are Forever " . The band also played a large gig at Dublin 's Malahide Castle on 16 June 2007 , with a second date added the following day . The band was also slated to play the Austin City Limits Music Festival in September 2007 . Other European festivals include Rock Werchter in 2007 . The band played two shows at Cardiff International Arena on 19 and 20 June 2007 supported by local friends of the band , Reverend and the Makers . It also played two London gigs at Alexandra Palace on 8 and 9 December 2007 . On 1 September 2007 the band insisted on taking a working holiday to Ibiza where it played what turned out to be the last ever full live Ibiza Rocks show in Bar M ( now Ibiza Rocks Bar ) . The band performed in front of 700 people in the bar by the beach whilst many thousands lined the beach outside unable to get a ticket – The Sun described this concert as the " rock event of the summer " stating that " most people left saying they had just witnessed the best gig of their lives " . The band played their last show of the tour on 17 December 2007 at Manchester Apollo , which was filmed for the live DVD ' At The Apollo ' which was released in cinemas the following year . 
 = = = Humbug ( 2008 – 10 ) = = = 
 After a brief hiatus during which Alex Turner toured and recorded with his side project The Last Shadow Puppets , the band recorded a total of 24 songs ; 12 in the Rancho De La Luna recording sessions with Josh Homme of Queens of the Stone Age in early autumn , 2008 , and 12 in the New York sessions with James Ford in spring , 2009 , following their January tour of New Zealand and Australia . During this tour , lead single " Crying Lightning " , along with Humbug songs " Pretty Visitors " , " Dangerous Animals " , and " Potion Approaching " ( then known as " Go @-@ Kart " ) , was debuted live . It was later revealed by Matt Helders in a video diary that the album would consist of 14 tracks and that Alex Turner would stay in New York to oversee the mixing of the material . However , the final track listing , revealed on 1 June 2009 , listed only 10 . 
 In a preview article on <unk> , writer Simon Harper claimed that the band had " completely defied any expectations or presumptions to explore the depths they can reach when stepping foot outside their accepted styles , " and that " Turner is his usual eloquent self , but has definitely graduated into an incomparable writer whose themes twist and turn through stories and allegories so potent and profound it actually leaves one breathless " . On the same site , Alex Turner revealed that the band had listened to Nick Cave , Jimi Hendrix , and Cream while writing the new album , the title of which would be Humbug . Humbug was released on 19 August 2009 , and , like both of its predecessors , the album went straight to No. 1 . 
 As announced on Arctic Monkeys ' website , the first single was " Crying Lightning " , released on 6 July , digitally through iTunes and also received its first radio premiere on the same day . On 12 July 2009 , the single " Crying Lightning " debuted at number 12 in the UK Singles Chart and number 1 on the UK Indie Chart . The second single , " Cornerstone " , was released on 16 November 2009 to much critical acclaim , but failed to replicate the same success that every prior Arctic Monkeys single had , reaching a peak at position 94 on the UK singles chart . It was announced in February 2010 that the third and final single to be taken from Humbug would be " My Propeller " , released on 22 March , shortly before a one off UK show at the Royal Albert Hall in support of the Teenage Cancer Trust on 27 March . 
 Arctic Monkeys embarked on the first leg of the worldwide Humbug Tour in January 2009 and went on to headline 2009 's Reading and Leeds Festivals . During this performance , it played a number of songs from Humbug , plus older tracks and a cover of Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds ' " Red Right Hand " . It was also the headline act on the first night of 2009 's Exit festival in Serbia . In North America , where it has less of a following , it played abridged sets at Montreal 's <unk> Festival , as well as New Jersey 's All Points West Music and Arts Festival . The tour finished on 22 April 2010 in Mexico . 
 = = = Suck It and See ( 2011 – 12 ) = = = 
 NME reported in May 2011 that the band were teaming up with producer James Ford once again , and would be releasing their fourth studio album in late spring at the earliest . Q magazine reported that the fourth Arctic Monkeys album would be of a " more accessible vintage " than Humbug . Q printed edition 299 states ' It 's the sound of a band drawing back the curtains and letting the sunshine in ' . 
 The album was recorded in Sound City Studios in Los Angeles in 2010 and 2011 . On 4 March 2011 the band premièred on its website a new track called " Brick by Brick " with lead vocals by Matt Helders . Helders explained that this is not a single , just a tease of what is coming and that is definitely going to be in the fourth album . On 10 March 2011 the band revealed the album is to be called Suck It and See and was released on 6 June 2011 . 
 Their fourth album 's first single , titled " Don 't Sit Down ' Cause I 've Moved Your Chair " was released as a digital download on 11 April , and on Vinyl with " Brick by Brick " on 16 April for Record Store Day . On 17 April , it went to No. 28 in the UK Singles Chart . A version of the single with 2 B @-@ sides was released on 7 and 10 inch vinyl on 30 May . The band allowed fans to listen to the entire album on their website before deciding about whether to purchase it or not . Suck It and See was then released on 6 June 2011 , and went straight to No. 1 in the album charts . In doing so , Arctic Monkeys became only the second band in history to debut four albums in a row at the top of the charts . 
 The band announced " The Hellcat Spangled <unk> " as the second single to be taken from Suck It and See . Most of the stock was burned because of the London riots . A limited edition 7 " Vinyl of the single was then released over the band 's website on 14 August . The song only managed to chart in the top 200 in the UK , however reaching higher in Belgium at No. 25 . In September 2011 the band released a music video for the song " Suck It and See " featuring drummer Matt Helders , and announced they would be releasing it as a single on 31 October 2011 . In July 2011 , the band released a live EP over iTunes with 6 live recordings from the iTunes Festival in London . 
 Arctic Monkeys embarked in May 2011 on their Suck It and See Tour . They headlined the <unk> Festival 2011 alongside The Strokes , Arcade Fire and Primal Scream . They also headlined Oxegen 2011 , Super Bock Super Rock 2011 , V Festival 2011 , Rock <unk> and T in The Park . They confirmed on 7 February that they were playing two " massive homecoming shows " at the Don Valley Bowl in Sheffield on 10 and 11 June , support included Miles Kane , Anna Calvi , The Vaccines , Dead Sons and Mabel Love , clips from the show were also used in the music video for " The Hellcat Spangled <unk> " . They played at Lollapalooza 5 – 7 August 2011 . On 21 August , they also played at Lowlands , the Netherlands . The tour continued until March 2012 . On Friday 27 July 2012 Arctic Monkeys performed during the 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony in the Olympic Stadium , London . 
 On 27 October they released a music video for " Evil Twin " on YouTube , the b @-@ side to their new single " Suck It and See " . They performed the song on The Graham Norton Show on 28 October . The 4th single from Suck It and See , " Black <unk> " was released on 23 January 2012 . The video for the single was released on YouTube on 5 January 2012 . This video continued the theme from the previous single , " Suck It and See " and " Evil Twin " . 
 = = = AM ( 2013 – 14 ) = = = 
 On 26 February 2012 , the band released a brand new song titled " R U Mine ? " on their YouTube channel . On 4 March , it went to No. 23 on the UK Singles Chart on downloads alone . On 21 April , the song was released as a single , with the track " Electricity " as a B @-@ side , released additionally for the Record Store Day . The song marked a direct shift in musical direction in comparison to their previous album , Suck It and See , by incorporating a heavy use of falsetto and hip hop beats , and eventually became the inspiration for AM . 
 On 27 July 2012 , Arctic Monkeys played in the London Summer Olympics opening ceremony , performing " I Bet You Look Good on the Dancefloor " and a cover of The Beatles ' song " Come Together " . After the opening ceremony , their version of " Come Together " entered the UK Singles Chart . It later peaked at number 21 , becoming their highest charting single since 2009 's " Crying Lightning " . 
 On 22 May 2013 the band started the AM Tour at the Ventura Theatre in Ventura , California , where they debuted a new song titled " Do I Wanna Know ? " . On 1 June 2013 , the band performed at Free Press Summer Fest in Houston , TX , where they also played " Do I Wanna Know ? " . On 14 June , the band debuted another song titled " Mad Sounds " at <unk> Festival in Sweden . Four days later , on 18 June 2013 , the band released the official video to " Do I Wanna Know ? " via their Facebook page . The studio version of the song , along with accompanying visuals , was also made available to purchase via iTunes , and entered the UK Singles Chart at number 11 . On 23 June 2013 Arctic Monkeys headlined Southside Festival in Germany . 
 On 24 June 2013 , the band announced that their new album , entitled AM , would be released on 9 September 2013 . The album was recorded in Rancho de la Luna in Joshua Tree , California , and features guest appearances from Josh Homme of Queens of the Stone Age , Elvis Costello 's drummer Pete Thomas and Bill Ryder @-@ Jones of The Coral . Further , on 27 June , the band announced an eight date UK arena tour culminating with a homecoming gig at the <unk> Arena Sheffield . The band played at the 2013 Glastonbury Festival on 28 June as headliners at the Pyramid stage to resounding success , playing ' Mad Sounds ' and ' Do I Wanna Know ? ' from the forthcoming album ' AM ' . Arctic Monkeys also headlined the 2013 Open 'er Festival in Gdynia , Poland and played on the main stage on 4 July . On 20 July , the band performed at <unk> 2013 . 
 On 11 August 2013 , the third single from the album , " Why 'd You Only Call Me When You 're High ? " , was released , with B @-@ Side ' Stop The World I Wanna Get Off With You ' . It debuted at no . 8 on the UK Singles Chart on 18 August 2013 , making it the band 's first UK Top 10 single since 2007 's " Fluorescent Adolescent " . The band streamed the album in its entirety four days ahead of its release . 
 Upon the release of AM on 9 September 2013 , the album debuted at number 1 in the UK album charts , selling over 157 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . As a result , Arctic Monkeys made history as the first independent label band with five consecutive number 1 albums in the UK . The album received widespread critical acclaim and brought Arctic Monkeys their third nomination for the Mercury Prize . The album also won the Brit award for Best British Album . 
 Alex Turner described AM as the band 's " most original [ album ] yet , " merging hip @-@ hop drum beats with 70 's heavy rock . The frontman has said that the song " Arabella " expresses the two styles of the album most effectively in one track . On AM , Turner continued to experiment with unusual lyrics , and the album includes the words from poem " I Wanna Be Yours " by John Cooper Clarke . Turner has stated that Homme 's appearance on the song " Knee Socks " marks his favourite moment of the whole album . 
 Arctic Monkeys headlined the Reading and Leeds Festival in August 2014 , with Turner stating ' I 'm going to have fun with you , Yorkshire ' at the Leeds show . The band had a handful of shows in late 2014 , which closed the ' AM ' Tour . In December 2014 , " Do I Wanna Know ? " was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Rock Performance . 
 = = = Hiatus ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 On 24 August 2014 , the band announced a hiatus following their AM tour . 
 Turner and Helders have both pursued other projects during this time . In 2016 , Turner announced his second album with The Last Shadow Puppets , Everything You 've Come to Expect . Helders played as a featured performer on Iggy Pop 's Post Pop Depression . 
 On 6 July 2016 , all four members of the band appeared together in public for the first time since the end of their AM tour . It was to promote the Sheffield Children 's Hospital arts trail . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 The band 's music is known to fall under the umbrella of indie rock . A key part of their sound , and one that translates across their whole discography , is lead singer and frontman Alex Turner 's intricate and often rapidly delivered lyrics , sung in a distinctive strong Sheffield accent that their music became famed for in their early years . A large part of their iconic British sound is credited to the punk poet John Cooper Clarke from whom the Arctic Monkeys even borrowed lyrics and the title from in " I Wanna Be Yours " . Turner adapted Clarke 's method of delivery mostly in their first album , Whatever People Say I Am That 's What I 'm Not . Their early albums Whatever People Say I Am That 's What I 'm Not and Favourite Worst Nightmare were rooted in garage rock and post @-@ punk revival , with Turner 's sharp lyrics the focal point . On the first album Alex Turner examined human behaviour in nightclubs and in the culture of the band 's hometown , Sheffield . Turner describes " Dancing Shoes " as being about " people always looking to pull when they go out however much they mask it . " 
 These themes continued on the following album Favourite Worst Nightmare with the band still progressing as musicians . Songs such as " Fluorescent Adolescent " and " Do Me a Favour " explored failed relationships , nostalgia and growing old , while musically the band took up a more uptempo and aggressive sound . 
 Their third album Humbug includes strong stoner rock and desert rock elements , due to the influence of the album 's producer and Queens of The Stone Age frontman , Joshua Homme . For Humbug , the band actively sought a new sound . Homme was quoted saying , " They came to me : ' Will you take us to the weird and the strange ? ' " 
 Their fourth album Suck It and See sees the band exploring styles , mixing them with newfound maturity . Turner said : " I think the new album is a balance between our first three . There 's nothing about taxi ranks or anything like that , but there 's a bit of the standpoint I had on those early songs and the sense of humour , but also there 's a bit of the ' Humbug ' stuff which is kind of off in the corners . " Critics noted an influence from British rock bands from the 1960s , as well as The Smiths , and slower , love @-@ themed ballads featured more heavily on the album than the fast @-@ paced , rockier songs that typifies the band 's sound . 
 In a 2012 interview with NME magazine , frontman Alex Turner cited John Lennon as a major influence lyrically . Speaking about Lennon , Turner said ; " I remember when I first started writing songs , and writing lyrics , I really wanted to be able to write an " I Am the Walrus " type song , and I found it very difficult . You listen to that and it sounds like it 's all nonsense , but it 's difficult to write that sort of thing and make it compelling . Lennon definitely had a knack for that " . 
 According to the band , the fifth album AM is more hip @-@ hop influenced . As Alex Turner stated in an interview with NME , it 's " like a Dr. Dre beat , but we 've given it an Ike Turner bowl @-@ cut and sent it galloping across the desert on a Stratocaster " . He also cited Outkast , Aaliyah and Black Sabbath as influences for the album . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Whatever People Say I Am , That 's What I 'm Not ( 2006 ) 
 Favourite Worst Nightmare ( 2007 ) 
 Humbug ( 2009 ) 
 Suck It and See ( 2011 ) 
 AM ( 2013 ) 
 = = Tour history = = 
 Whatever People Say I Am Tour ( 2005 – 06 ) 
 Favourite Worst Nightmare Tour ( 2007 – 08 ) 
 Humbug Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) 
 Suck It and See Tour ( 2011 – 12 ) 
 AM Tour ( 2013 – 14 ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Delaware Route 6 = 
 Delaware Route 6 ( DE 6 ) is a state highway in Kent County , Delaware . It runs from Maryland Route 291 ( MD 291 ) at the Maryland border west of Blackiston to the Delaware Bay in Woodland Beach . The route passes through rural areas of northern Kent County as well as the towns of Smyrna and Clayton . DE 6 intersects DE 42 in Blackiston , DE 15 in Clayton , DE 300 and U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) in Smyrna , and DE 9 to the east of Smyrna . The road was built as a state highway during the 1920s and 1930s and received the DE 6 designation by 1936 . The easternmost part of the route was paved in the 1960s and the route was moved to its current alignment bypassing downtown Smyrna by the 1990s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 6 begins at the Maryland border , where the road continues west into that state as MD 291 . From the state line , the route heads east on two @-@ lane undivided Millington Road , passing through the Blackiston Wildlife Area . The road runs through areas of woods and farms with some homes . In Blackiston , DE 6 intersects the western terminus of DE 42 , which heads southeast toward Kenton . The route continues east through more agricultural areas and reaches an intersection with DE 15 , at which point residential development near the road increases . DE 15 turns east to form a concurrency with DE 6 , with the two routes continuing east . Upon reaching the western edge of Clayton , DE 15 splits from DE 6 by heading to the north . 
 DE 6 proceeds northeast through Clayton on Main Street , where it passes homes along with a few businesses . In Clayton , the road crosses Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line at @-@ grade as it turns more to the east . The route continues into Smyrna , where it becomes Smyrna Clayton Boulevard . Shortly after crossing into Smyrna , DE 6 intersects DE 300 , where it turns northeast onto Glenwood Avenue and forms a concurrency with DE 300 . The two routes pass a mix of homes and businesses before entering a commercial area in the northern part of Smyrna . Here , the road widens into a divided highway before intersecting US 13 . At this point , DE 300 ends and DE 6 turns southeast to form a concurrency with US 13 . The two routes pass more businesses on four @-@ lane divided Dupont Boulevard . DE 6 splits from US 13 by heading to the east on two @-@ lane undivided Commerce Street , running through residential areas . The route passes over the DE 1 toll road without an interchange and leaves Smyrna . 
 Upon leaving Smyrna , DE 6 becomes Woodland Beach Road and passes to the north of Smyrna Airport . The road heads east into agricultural areas , crossing Mill Creek as it winds east . The route intersects DE 9 before turning northeast into marshland within the Woodland Beach Wildlife Area . DE 6 turns north and reaches its eastern terminus at an intersection with Delaware Avenue in the community of Woodland Beach , located along the Delaware Bay . 
 The portion of the route between Alley Mill Road west of Clayton and DE 300 in Smyrna is part of the Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Byway , a Delaware Byway . DE 6 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 21 @,@ 997 vehicles at the east end of the US 13 concurrency to a low of 764 vehicles at the Lighthouse Road intersection . None of DE 6 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , what is now DE 6 existed as an unimproved county road . The road was completed as a state highway within Clayton and was proposed as one from Clayton west to Blackiston by 1924 . On August 5 , 1925 , the state highway between Clayton and Blackiston was completed . In 1929 , the road leading to Woodland Beach was completed as a state highway . The portion of the road between Blackiston and the Maryland border was upgraded to a state highway in 1930 . When Delaware created its state highway system by 1936 , DE 6 was routed between the Maryland border west of Blackiston and Woodland Beach , following its current alignment to Smyrna , passing through Smyrna on Commerce Street , and continuing east on its current alignment to Woodland Beach . All of the route was paved except for the easternmost portion . The eastern portion of the road was paved by 1967 . By the 1990s , DE 6 was routed onto its current alignment through Smyrna along DE 300 and US 13 , bypassing the downtown area . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Kent County . 
 = Paul Oscar = 
 Páll Óskar Hjálmtýsson ( born 16 March 1970 ) , known internationally as Páll Óskar and Paul Oscar , is an Icelandic pop singer , songwriter and disc jockey . He had a musical childhood , singing at private functions , with choirs and for media advertisements , but was affected by bullying in school and tension between his parents at home . He came out as gay to his family at the age of 16 years . 
 Paul Oscar 's musical range spans traditional Icelandic songs , ballads , love songs , disco , house and techno . He released his first album , Stuð ( Groove ) , in 1993 while in New York City , and also sang with Icelandic groups <unk> ( The Millionaires ) and Casino while establishing a career as a solo artiste . His album of ballads , Palli , was the best @-@ selling Icelandic album of 1995 . Paul Oscar came to international attention when he performed " Minn hinsti dans " ( " My Final Dance " ) , Iceland 's entry for the Eurovision Song Contest 1997 . His most recent album is <unk> ( The Silver Collection , 2008 ) . In Reykjavík , Paul Oscar performs regularly as a disc jockey in clubs and appears on radio and TV shows . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The youngest of seven children of <unk> E. Hjálmtýsson , a bank clerk , and Margrét <unk> , a writer , Paul Oscar was born on 16 March 1970 in Reykjavík . As a child he displayed artistic talent in drawing , writing fairy tales and singing – his mother had him sing for the women in her sewing club and at family birthday parties . He also spent much time singing in choirs and in media commercials , and recorded his first album at the age of seven . His first leading role in a professional theatre production was at 12 years of age in the musical version of Rubber Tarzan , a popular Danish children 's novel by Ole Lund <unk> ( 1940 – 1979 ) . His voice broke two weeks after the musical 's last performance , and he did not sing for the next few years . 
 Although Paul Oscar 's family encouraged his musical talent , his parents did not get along with each other , and he was bullied by his schoolmates . Paul Oscar recalled : " My nickname was Little Palli , and Palli was chubby , nerdy , someone who never got jokes right , who was afraid of other men . " At age 13 , he realized that he found men attractive , and came out to his family at 16 . " For the first day , there was nice talk of acceptance , though my father did raise his voice . On the second day , and the third , and the fourth , there was this terrible silence . They treated me like an alien . " However , his mother was supportive . She said : " If Páll has the talent to fall in love , he should nurture that talent . And he has as much a right to sit down at my table with his partner as anybody else does with their partner . " 
 Paul Oscar rediscovered his voice at the age of 18 , singing bass with the <unk> college choir for two years . In 1990 he won a talent contest for his college ; later that year at the time of his graduation , he played Frank @-@ N @-@ Furter to great success in the college 's production of The Rocky Horror Picture Show . Around the same time , he began appearing in drag shows at a notorious Reykjavík nightclub . After the club closed , he became a radio jockey on independent radio station FM 90 @,@ 9 . He also appeared in a film , <unk> á <unk> sem á <unk> ( As in Heaven , 1992 ) . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 In the summer of 1993 , Paul Oscar left Iceland for New York City , where he met fellow Icelanders <unk> <unk> and Sigurjón Kjartansson who were then on tour with heavy metal band HAM . Paul Oscar became their groupie , and about the same time released his first album , Stuð ( Groove ) . In October 1993 , Paul Oscar started singing with a band called <unk> ( The Millionaires ) , which released the albums <unk> á mann ( A Million for Each , 1994 ) , <unk> <unk> ( The Whole Lot , 1999 ) and <unk> er <unk> <unk> <unk> ( This is Completely Foolish , 2001 ) . 
 The year 1995 saw Paul Oscar make his début as a solo artiste . In that year he formed his own recording company , Paul Oscar Productions ( <unk> ) and released an album of ballads entitled Palli which he personally arranged , performed and produced . It was the best @-@ selling Icelandic album of 1995 . This was followed by his album Seif in 1996 . 
 Paul Oscar was Iceland 's entrant in the annual Eurovision Song Contest in 1997 . He performed the song " Minn hinsti dans " ( " My Final Dance " ) , which he co @-@ wrote , backed by four women dressed in latex playing suggestively on a sofa behind him . Although the song only reached 20th place in a field of 25 , the daring presentation attracted wide attention , especially amongst gay audiences , and made him known internationally . In 1998 he was invited to appear in A Song for Eurotrash , a one @-@ off special of the British Channel 4 TV series Eurotrash that was based on the Eurovision Song Contest . He also presented a musical feature Popp i Reykjavík ( Pop in Reykjavík ) . 
 Paul Oscar worked with easy @-@ listening group Casino on their album Stereo ( 1998 ) . He followed this with three albums : the English @-@ language album Deep Inside ( 1999 ) ; and two collaborations with harpist Monika Abendroth , Ef ég <unk> <unk> ( If I Won 't Sleep Tonight , 2001 ) and <unk> <unk> ( The Lights at Home , 2003 ) ( his sister Sigrún Hjálmtýsdóttir ( Diddú ) also appeared on the latter album ) . His musical range spans traditional Icelandic songs , ballads , love songs in the style of Burt Bacharach , disco , house and techno . 
 At home in Reykjavík , Paul Oscar performs regularly as a disc jockey in clubs and appears on radio and TV shows . He was a judge in the third season of Idol <unk> ( Idol <unk> , 2005 ) , Iceland 's version of the UK reality TV series Pop Idol ; and in The X Factor ( 2006 ) , also modelled on the UK 's The X Factor . In 2002 he appeared as Dr. Love in the teenage movie <unk> ( Made in Iceland ) . 
 He has a reputation for being brash , even rude , when it comes to discussing gay concerns , especially gay sex . <unk> <unk> , Director of <unk> ' 78 , Iceland 's gay and lesbian rights group , has commented : " He says things I could never say . But he is an exquisite addition to the gay voice in Iceland . " As a gay activist , Paul Oscar helped to organize a Gay Pride Festival in Reykjavík in 2005 . 
 Paul Oscar has said he realizes that " as a working place Iceland will be too small for me . Actually , it already is . But I am an Icelander . I will always keep a home here . My roots are so valuable to me . I wouldn 't change them for a sack of gold . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Regarding his personal life , Paul Oscar has said : " I have a lot of work still to do . I have had three relationships that , from the outside , looked picture perfect , I suppose . But they were actually quite rotten and false , abusive to me . What I am doing now is learning to fall in love with myself . " 
 Paul Oscar 's father <unk> E. Hjálmtýsson ( 5 July 1933 – 12 September 2002 ) , with whom he had a difficult relationship , had roles in the Icelandic comedies Með <unk> á <unk> ( On Top , 1982 ) , <unk> ( A Policeman 's Life , 1985 ) , and <unk> Hekla ( The Men 's Choir , 1992 ) . His older sister , Sigrún Hjálmtýsdóttir ( Diddú ) , is an opera singer . 
