 = = Selected discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 Stuð ( Groove , 1993 ) 
 Palli ( 1995 ) 
 Seif ( 1996 ) 
 Deep Inside ( 1999 ) 
 Ef ég <unk> <unk> ( If I Won 't Sleep Tonight , 2001 ) ( in collaboration with harpist Monika Abendroth ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( The Lights at Home , 2003 ) ( with Monika Abendroth and Sigrún Hjálmtýsdóttir ( Diddú ) ) 
 Allt fyrir <unk> ( All in the Name of Love , 2007 ) 
 <unk> ( The Silver Collection , 2008 ) 
 Páll Óskar - Box ( 6 <unk> fyrir 1 ) ( compilation , six albums in one , 2014 ) 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Minn hinsti dans " ( My Final Dance , 1997 ) ( Iceland 's Eurovision Song Contest 1997 entry ) [ 1 ] 
 " Allt fyrir <unk> " ( All in the Name of Love , 2007 ) 
 " International " ( 2007 ) 
 " <unk> <unk> " ( 2007 ) 
 " Er <unk> <unk> ? " ( 2008 ) 
 " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> í <unk> " ( 2008 ) 
 " Sama <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( 2008 ) 
 " La Dolce Vita " ( 2011 ) 
 " <unk> er eins og ég er " ( 2011 ) 
 " <unk> sem <unk> " ( 2015 ) 
 = Golondrina point = 
 Golondrina points ( formerly Plainview Golondrina ) are lanceolate spear or dart projectile points , of medium size , dated to the transitional Paleo @-@ Indian Period , between 9000 – 7000 BP . Golondrina points were attached on split @-@ stem <unk> and may have served to bring down medium @-@ sized animals such as deer , as well as functioning as butchering knives . Distribution is widespread throughout most of Texas , and points have also been discovered in Arkansas and Mexico . The concentration of Golondrina specimens is highest across the South Texas Plains , where the point is the most prevalent of Paleo @-@ Indian types and defines a distinctive cultural pattern for the region . The Golondrina point is so named for its flared basal corners ( " ears " ) , which resemble a swallow 's ( <unk> in Spanish ) split tail . Classification of Golondrina can be difficult because of its similarity to other types , particularly the Plainview point , to which it was originally thought to be related . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Classification of the Golondrina point was made by Texas Historical Commission archeologist LeRoy Johnson Jr. in 1964 , after the discovery of a collection of unrecognized projectile points at the Devil 's Mouth site in the Amistad Reservoir , Texas . Initially believed to be related to the Plainview point classification , the new type was termed " Plainview Golondrina " by Johnson , who used a genus @-@ species approach for the naming . This classification method sought to describe the relationship between the two types , placing Plainview as the genus , and Golondrina as the species , to highlight key similarities and differences . But by 1977 , the genus @-@ species classification approach had been discarded , and the name Golondrina alone was being used to represent the Devil 's Mouth specimens . Subsequent research and technological analysis determined this type to be separate and distinct from the <unk> point , and the name was shortened to simply " Golondrina " by Thomas C. Kelly in 1982 . The type takes its name from a pronounced flaring of the basal corners ( stem ) , which recall the split tail of a swallow ( <unk> in Spanish ) . The Golondrina is considered to be a Plano point . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Golondrina point is medium @-@ sized and lanceolate @-@ shaped with a lenticular cross @-@ section that exhibits convex sides . The type displays a distinctive <unk> ( " eared " ) stem with basal corners that flare outward . The blade edges are slightly serrated with a recurved outline — wide at the bottom , then narrowing before becoming wide and then thin again at the distal end , a so @-@ called " fish shaped profile " . The flaking style is generally random , with no attention given to alignment of flake scars . However , collateral flaking — where parallel flakes have been removed equally , resulting in a median ridge on the blade edges — has also been observed in some specimens . The basal edge of the Golondrina presents concave with a deep basal notch that varies from a flattened , inverted , v @-@ shape to recurved . The Golondrina point can range in length from 32 – 61 mm , with a width ranging from 23 – 32 mm and a thickness from 6 – 8 mm . The width of the base ranges from 22 – 29 mm with a typical basal concavity of 4 mm or more . The Golondrina is <unk> , without a longitudinal channel flake . 
 The point has an expanding hafting area where the width , upward from the stem , increases in size . Analysis suggests that Golondrina points were attached on split @-@ stem <unk> either with or without <unk> . They may have served a dual function as projectile points as well as butchering knives . By nature of a split @-@ stem haft style , Golondrina points would not need to be deeply set , resulting in a largely exposed cutting edge . The hafting area , as well as the side and basal edges are usually ground dull . 
 Edwards chert , Alibates agate , and <unk> jasper were the major materials utilized by Paleo @-@ Indians in the Southern Plains for the manufacture of flaked stone implements . Chert was the most important stone for tool making throughout pre @-@ historic central Texas and there were many available sites where it was acquired and knapped . 
 = = Age and cultural affiliations = = 
 Most Golondrina points have been dated to the Transitional Paleo @-@ Indian Period , between 9000 – 7000 BP , with excavation of stratified sites along with radiocarbon dating providing a definitive age . The first dating of Golondrina points was made after excavations of area C in the Devil 's Mouth site which revealed Paleo @-@ Indian projectile points that were radiocarbon assayed to 8700 BP . Later excavations in 1976 , at the nearby Baker Cave in Texas , revealed a large hearth in the Golondrina stratum containing a wide variety of small game and plant remains left by early hunter gathers . This archaeological assemblage was termed Golondrina Complex , and the materials were attributed to the post @-@ Pleistocene period . At the same site , Golondrina materials stratified near the base of a rock @-@ shelter deposit were radiocarbon dated at 9000 BP 
 Projectile points featuring more Archaic characteristics , including early barbed and early stemmed , share an overlapping chronology with Golondrina . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Golondrina points are widespread across much of central , southern , and western Texas , with distribution extending northward along the Balcones Escarpment . They are particularly prevalent across the South Texas Plains , so much so as to be said to represent the first unique cultural pattern in the area . Most Golondrina specimens from the South Texas Plains are not excavated but rather found on the site 's surface . They often appear as part of mixed collections with artifacts of later periods . Several sites have also been found in Arkansas as well as in the Lower Pecos Canyonlands and the Mexican states of Tamaulipas and Nuevo León . 
 = = Comparison with other projectile points = = 
 The Golondrina can be difficult to type because of its similarity to other point classifications . In particular the distinction between Golondrina and Plainview is not yet completely resolved . 
 = = = Plainview = = = 
 Past hypotheses have suggested mistakenly that the Golondrina was a descendant or variant of the Plainview type . Although the two points exhibit similarities , particularly in terms of shape , they are now recognized as separate types . Identification is made from a lack of an <unk> , fishtail base on the Plainview and a deeper basal concavity on the Golondrina . Plainview points may have served to bring down large bison , while Golondrina points may have been used for killing smaller game such as deer , as well as doubling as a butchering knife . Compared to the split @-@ stem hafting style of the Golondrina point without a deep setting , the shape of the Plainview points would necessitate them being set relatively deeply into a socketed haft that once bound would leave less of the cutting edge exposed . Stratigraphic evidence from the St. Mary 's Hall site in southern , central Texas implies that Golondrina may have superseded Plainview on the southern Plains . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 The Simpson and Suwannee points , found in Florida and the Southeastern United States , are similar to the Golondrina in shape and age . The Dalton point , found in the central United States , shares a similar outline and basal corner <unk> with Golondrina , which may imply that they are part of a series . Identification is made by examination of the blade edges — Golondrina exhibits much less serration . The Meserve type has also been known to cause confusion , as it is considered a <unk> variant of the Plainview and Golondrina types . 
 = Kylie Minogue = 
 Kylie Ann Minogue , OBE ( / <unk> <unk> / ; born 28 May 1968 ) , often known simply as Kylie , is an Australian singer , songwriter , and actress . She achieved recognition starring in the Australian soap opera Neighbours , where she played tomboy mechanic Charlene Robinson . Appearing in the series for two years , Minogue 's character married Scott Robinson ( Jason Donovan ) in an episode viewed by nearly 20 million people in the United Kingdom making it one of the most watched Australian TV episodes ever . Since then , Minogue has been a recording artist and has achieved commercial success and critical acclaim in the entertainment industry . Minogue has been recognised with several honorific nicknames including " Princess of Pop " and " Goddess of Pop " . She is recognised as the highest @-@ selling Australian artist of all time by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . 
 Born and raised in Melbourne , Australia , Minogue has for many years worked and lived in London . She signed to PWL in 1987 and released her first studio album Kylie the next year . In 1992 , she left PWL and signed with Deconstruction Records and where she created her self @-@ titled studio album and Impossible Princess , both of which received positive reviews from critics . Returning to more mainstream dance @-@ oriented music , Minogue signed to Parlophone and released " Spinning Around " . Her 2001 single " Can 't Get You Out of My Head " became one of the most successful singles during the 2000s , selling over ten million units . It is recognised as her " signature song " and was named " ... the catchiest song ever " by Yahoo ! Music . Her album Fever ( 2001 ) was a hit in many countries , including the United States . Throughout her career , Minogue has released many successful singles , including " The Loco @-@ Motion " , " Especially for You " , " Hand on Your Heart " , " Better the Devil You Know " , " Confide in Me " , " Spinning Around " , " Slow " , " 2 Hearts " and " All The Lovers " . 
 In 2005 , while Minogue was on her Showgirl : The Greatest Hits Tour , she was diagnosed with breast cancer . After treatment , she resumed the tour under the title Showgirl : The Homecoming Tour , which critics viewed as a " triumph " . Minogue resumed work as an actress and appeared in the films Moulin Rouge ! ( 2001 ) , Jack & Diane , and Holy Motors ( 2012 ) . In 2014 , she appeared as a judge on the third series of The Voice UK and The Voice Australia . Her other ventures include product endorsements , children books and fashion . Minogue 's own company <unk> oversees all her endorsed products , musical recordings and her range of <unk> . 
 As of 2015 , Minogue has had worldwide record sales of more than 80 million . She has mounted several successful and critically acclaimed concert world tours and received a Mo Award for " Australian Entertainer of the Year " for her live performances . She was appointed OBE by Prince Charles in 2008 . She was appointed by the French government as a Chevalier ( knight ) of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres for her contribution to the enrichment of French culture . Minogue was awarded an honorary Doctor of Health Science ( <unk> ) degree by Anglia Ruskin University for her work in raising awareness for breast cancer . In November 2011 , on the 25th anniversary of the ARIA Music Awards , she was inducted by the Australian Recording Industry Association into the ARIA Hall of Fame . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1968 – 86 : Early life and career beginnings = = = 
 Kylie was born to Ronald Charles Minogue and Carol Ann Jones in Melbourne , Australia , on 28 May 1968 . Her father is a fifth generation Australian , and has Irish ancestry , while her mother came from Maesteg , Wales ; Carol 's mother originated from England . Jones had lived in Wales until age ten when her mother and father , Millie and Denis Jones , decided to move to Australia for a better life . Just before Kylie 's birth , Ron qualified as an accountant and worked through several jobs while Carol worked as a professional dancer . Kylie 's younger brother , Brendan is a news cameraman in Australia , while her younger sister Dannii Minogue is also a singer and television host . The Minogue family frequently moved around various suburbs in Melbourne to sustain their living expenses , which Kylie found unsettling as a child . After the birth of Dannii , the family moved to South Oakleigh . Because money was tight , Ron worked as an accountant at a family @-@ owned car company and Carol worked as a tea lady at a local hospital . 
 After moving to Surrey Hills , Melbourne , Minogue attended <unk> Primary School briefly before attending Camberwell Primary School . She went on to Camberwell High School . During her schooling years , Minogue found it difficult to make friends . She graduated high school with a high order certificate for Arts and Graphics and English . Minogue described herself as being of " average intelligence " and " quite modest " during her high school years . 
 Both Kylie and Dannii began their careers as children on Australian television . From the age of 11 , Kylie appeared in small roles in soap operas including The Sullivans and Skyways . In 1985 , she was cast in one of the lead roles in The Henderson Kids . Minogue took time off school to film The Henderson Kids and while Carol was not impressed , Minogue felt that she needed the independence to make it into the entertainment industry . During filming , co @-@ star Nadine Garner labelled Minogue " fragile " after producers yelled at her for forgetting her lines ; she would often cry on set . Minogue was dropped from the second season of the show after producer Alan Hardy felt the need for her character to be " written off " . In retrospect , Hardy stated that removing her from the showing " turned out to be the best thing for her " . 
 Interested in following a career in music , Minogue made a demo tape for the producers of weekly music programme Young Talent Time , which featured Dannii as a regular performer . Kylie gave her first television singing performance on the show in 1985 but was not invited to join the cast . Dannii 's success overshadowed Kylie 's acting achievements , until Kylie was cast in the soap opera Neighbours in 1986 , as Charlene Mitchell , a schoolgirl turned garage mechanic . Neighbours achieved popularity in the UK , and a story arc that created a romance between her character and the character played by Jason Donovan culminated in a wedding episode in 1987 that attracted an audience of 20 million British viewers . Minogue became the first person to win four Logie Awards in one year and was the youngest recipient of the " Gold Logie " as the country 's " Most Popular Television Performer " , with the result determined by public vote . 
 = = = 1987 – 89 : Kylie and Enjoy Yourself = = = 
 During a Fitzroy Football Club benefit concert with other Neighbours cast members , Minogue performed " I Got You Babe " as a duet with actor John Waters , and " The Loco @-@ Motion " as an encore . She was subsequently signed to a recording contract with Mushroom Records in 1987 . Her first single , " The Locomotion " , spent seven weeks at number one on the Australian singles charts and became the country 's highest @-@ selling single in the 1980s . She received the ARIA Award for the year 's highest @-@ selling single . Its success resulted in Minogue travelling to England with Mushroom Records executive Gary Ashley to work with producers Stock , Aitken & Waterman . They knew little of Minogue and had forgotten that she was arriving ; as a result , they wrote " I Should Be So Lucky " while she waited outside the studio . The song reached number one in the United Kingdom , Australia , Germany , Finland , Switzerland , Israel and Hong Kong . Minogue won her second consecutive ARIA Award for the year 's highest @-@ selling single , and received a " Special Achievement Award " . 
 Minogue 's debut album , Kylie was released in July 1988 . The album was a collection of dance @-@ oriented pop tunes and spent more than a year on the UK Albums Chart , including several weeks at number one . The album went gold in the United States , and the single , " The Locomotion " , reached number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , and number one on the Canadian Singles Chart . The single " Got to Be Certain " became her third consecutive number one single on the Australian music charts . Later in the year , she left Neighbours to focus on her music career . Minogue also collaborated with Jason Donovan for the song " Especially for You " , which peaked at number @-@ one in the United Kingdom and in December 2014 sold its one millionth copy in the UK . Minogue was sometimes referred to as " the Singing Budgie " by her detractors over the coming years . In a review of the album Kylie for AllMusic , Chris True described the tunes as " standard , late @-@ 80s ... bubblegum " , but added , " her cuteness makes these rather vapid tracks bearable " . 
 Minogue 's second album Enjoy Yourself was released in October 1989 . The album was a success in the United Kingdom , Europe , New Zealand , Asia and Australia and spawned number one singles " Hand on Your Heart " and " Tears on My Pillow " . However , it failed to sell well throughout North America and Minogue was dropped by her American record label Geffen Records . She then embarked on her first concert tour , the Enjoy Yourself Tour , in the United Kingdom , Europe , Asia and Australia in February 1990 . She was also one of the featured vocalists on the remake of " Do They Know It 's Christmas ? " . 
 Minogue 's debut film , The Delinquents was released in December 1989 . The movie was poorly received by critics but proved popular with audiences . In the UK it grossed more than £ 200 @,@ 000 , and in Australia , it was the fourth @-@ highest grossing local film of 1989 and the highest grossing local film of 1990 . 
 = = = 1990 – 92 : Rhythm of Love and Let 's Get to It = = = 
 Minogue 's third album , Rhythm of Love was released in November 1990 and was described as " ... leaps and bounds more mature ... " than her previous albums . Her relationship with Michael Hutchence was also seen as part of her departure from her earlier persona . She then embarked on the Rhythm of Love Tour in February 1991 . 
 Minogue 's fourth album , Let 's Get to It was released in October 1991 and reached number 15 on the UK Albums Chart . It was her first album to fail to reach the top ten . While the first single from the album , " Word Is Out " , became her first single to miss the top ten of the UK Singles Chart , subsequent singles " If You Were with Me Now " and " Give Me Just a Little More Time " both reached the top five . In support of the album , she embarked on the Let 's Get to It Tour in October . She had fulfilled the requirements of her contract with her record company and elected not to renew it . She later expressed her opinion that she was stifled by Stock , Aitken and Waterman , saying , " I was very much a puppet in the beginning . I was blinkered by my record company . I was unable to look left or right . " 
 Minogue 's first Greatest Hits album was released in August 1992 . It reached number one in the United Kingdom and number three in Australia . The singles from the album , " What Kind of Fool " and her cover version of Kool & the Gang 's " Celebration " both reached the top twenty of the UK Singles Chart . 
 = = = 1993 – 98 : Kylie Minogue and Impossible Princess = = = 
 Minogue 's signing with Deconstruction Records in 1993 marked a new phase in her career . Her fifth album Kylie Minogue was released in September 1994 and sold well in Europe and Australia . It was produced by dance music producers the Brothers In Rhythm , namely Dave Seaman and Steve Anderson ( musician ) , who had previously produced Finer Feelings , her last single with PWL . As of 2015 , Anderson continued to be Minogue 's musical director . The lead single , " Confide in Me " , spent four weeks at number one on the Australian singles chart . The next two singles from the album , " Put Yourself in My Place " and " Where Is the Feeling ? " , reached the top twenty on the UK Singles Chart , while the album peaked at number four on the UK Albums Chart , eventually selling 250 @,@ 000 copies . 
 During this period , Minogue made a guest appearance as herself in an episode of the comedy The Vicar of Dibley . Director Steven E. de Souza saw Minogue 's cover photo in Australia 's Who Magazine as one of " The 30 Most Beautiful People in the World " and offered her a role opposite Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme in the film Street Fighter . The film was a moderate success , earning US $ 70 million in the US , but received poor reviews , with The Washington Post 's Richard Harrington calling Minogue " the worst actress in the English @-@ speaking world " . She had a minor role in the 1996 film Bio @-@ Dome starring Pauly Shore and Stephen Baldwin . She also appeared in the 1995 short film Hayride to Hell and in the 1997 film Diana & Me . 
 In 1995 , Minogue collaborated with Australian artist Nick Cave for the song " Where the Wild Roses Grow " . Cave had been interested in working with Minogue since hearing " Better the Devil You Know " , saying it contained " one of pop music 's most violent and distressing lyrics " . The music video for their song was inspired by John Everett Millais 's painting Ophelia ( 1851 – 1852 ) , and showed Minogue as the murdered woman , floating in a pond as a serpent swam over her body . The single received widespread attention in Europe , where it reached the top 10 in several countries , and reached number two in Australia . The song won ARIA Awards for " Song of the Year " and " Best Pop Release " . Following concert appearances with Cave , Minogue recited the lyrics to " I Should Be So Lucky " as poetry in London 's Royal Albert Hall . 
 By 1997 , Minogue was in a relationship with French photographer Stéphane Sednaoui , who encouraged her to develop her creativity . Inspired by a mutual appreciation of Japanese culture , they created a visual combination of " geisha and manga superheroine " for the photographs taken for Minogue 's sixth album Impossible Princess and the video for " German Bold Italic " , Minogue 's collaboration with Towa Tei . She drew inspiration from the music of artists such as Shirley Manson and Garbage , Björk , Tricky and U2 , and Japanese pop musicians such as Pizzicato Five and Towa Tei . The album featured collaborations with musicians including James Dean Bradfield and Sean Moore of the Manic Street Preachers . Mostly a dance album , Minogue countered suggestions that she was trying to become an indie artist . Acknowledging that she had attempted to escape the perceptions of her that had developed during her early career , she commented that she was ready to " forget the painful criticism " and " accept the past , embrace it , use it " . The music video for " Did It Again " paid homage to her earlier incarnations . Retitled Kylie Minogue in the UK following the death of Diana , Princess of Wales , it became the lowest @-@ selling album of her career . At the end of the year , a campaign by Virgin Radio stated , " We 've done something to improve Kylie 's records : we 've banned them . " In Australia , the album was a success and spent 35 weeks on the album chart . 
 Minogue 's Intimate and Live tour in 1998 was extended due to demand . She gave several live performances in Australia , including the 1998 Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras , and the opening ceremonies of Melbourne 's Crown Casino , and Sydney 's Fox Studios in 1999 ( where she performed Marilyn Monroe 's " Diamonds Are a Girl 's Best Friend " ) as well as a Christmas concert in Dili , East Timor , in association with the United Nations Peace @-@ Keeping Forces . She played a small role in the Australian @-@ made Molly Ringwald 2000 film Cut . 
 = = = 1999 – 2004 : Light Years , Fever and Body Language = = = 
 After Minogue parted ways with Deconstruction Records , she performed a duet with the Pet Shop Boys ' on their Nightlife album and spent several months in Barbados performing in Shakespeare 's The Tempest . She then appeared in the film Sample People and recorded a cover version of Russell Morris 's " The Real Thing " for the soundtrack . In April 1999 , she signed with Parlophone Records , which wanted to re @-@ establish Minogue as a pop artist . 
 In September 2000 , Minogue released her seventh studio album , Light Years . The album was a collection of dance songs , influenced by disco music . It generated strong reviews and was successful throughout Australia , Asia , Europe and New Zealand . The lead single , " Spinning Around " , became her first number one in the United Kingdom in ten years , and its accompanying video featured Minogue in revealing gold hot pants , which came to be regarded as a " trademark " . The second single , " On a Night Like This " reached number one in Australia and number two in the United Kingdom . " Kids " , a duet with Robbie Williams , also peaked at number two in the United Kingdom . 
 At the 2000 Sydney Olympics closing ceremony , Minogue performed ABBA 's " Dancing Queen " and her single " On a Night Like This " . She then embarked on the On a Night Like This Tour , which played to sell @-@ out crowds in Australia and the United Kingdom . The tour incorporated Burlesque and theatre and cited the style of Broadway shows such as 42nd Street , films such as Anchors Aweigh , South Pacific , the Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers musicals of the 1930s and the live performances of Bette Midler as inspiration . Minogue was praised for her new material and her reinterpretations of some of her greatest successes . She won a " Mo Award " for Australian live entertainment as " Performer of the Year " . She also appeared in the 2001 film , Moulin Rouge ! as " The Green Fairy " . 
 In October 2001 , Minogue released her eighth studio album Fever . The album contained disco elements combined with 1980s electropop and synthpop . It reached number one in Australia , United Kingdom , and throughout Europe , eventually achieving worldwide sales in excess of eight million . The album 's lead single , " Can 't Get You Out of My Head " , became the biggest success of her career , reaching number one in more than forty countries and selling over 5 million copies . She won four ARIA Awards including a " Most Outstanding Achievement " award , and two Brit Awards , for " Best international female solo artist " and " Best international album " . Following extensive airplay by American radio , Capitol Records released the song and the album Fever in the US in 2002 . The album debuted on the Billboard 200 albums chart at number three , and " Can 't Get You out of My Head " reached number seven on the Hot 100 . The subsequent singles " In Your Eyes " , " Love at First Sight " and " Come into My World " were successful throughout the world , and Minogue established a presence in the mainstream North American market , particularly in the club scene . She followed the success of the album by touring the United States with the Jingle Ball festival . In April 2002 , Minogue embarked on the KylieFever2002 tour which became the biggest production she had put on to date . Later that year , she worked in a voice role on the animated film The Magic Roundabout , which was released in 2005 in Europe . In 2003 , she received a Grammy Award nomination for " Best Dance Recording " for " Love at First Sight " , and the following year won the same award for " Come into My World " . 
 In November 2003 , Minogue released her ninth studio album Body Language following an invitation @-@ only concert , titled Money Can 't Buy , at the Hammersmith Apollo in London . The album downplayed the disco style and was inspired by 1980s artists such as Scritti Politti , The Human League , Adam and the Ants and Prince , blending their styles with elements of hip hop . The sales of the album were lower than anticipated after the success of Fever , though the first single , " Slow " , was a number @-@ one hit in the United Kingdom and Australia . Two more singles from the album were released : " Red Blooded Woman " and " Chocolate " . In the US , " Slow " reached number @-@ one on the club chart and received a Grammy Award nomination in the Best Dance Recording category . Body Language achieved first week sales of 43 @,@ 000 and declined significantly in the second week . In November 2004 , Minogue released her second official greatest hits album entitled Ultimate Kylie . The album yielded two singles : " I Believe in You " and " Giving You Up " . " I Believe in You " was later nominated for a Grammy Award in the category of " Best Dance Recording " . 
 = = = 2005 – 09 : Showgirl and X = = = 
 In March 2005 , Minogue commenced her Showgirl : The Greatest Hits Tour . After performing in Europe , she travelled to Melbourne , where she was diagnosed with breast cancer , forcing her to cancel the tour . She resumed the tour in November 2006 with a performance in Sydney . Her dance routines had been reworked to accommodate her medical condition , with slower costume changes and longer breaks introduced between sections of the show to conserve her strength . The media reported that Minogue performed energetically , with the Sydney Morning Herald describing the show as an " extravaganza " and " nothing less than a triumph " . 
 In November 2007 , Minogue released her tenth and much @-@ discussed " comeback " album , X. The electro @-@ styled album included contributions from Guy Chambers , Cathy Dennis , Bloodshy & Avant and Calvin Harris . The album received some criticism for the triviality of its subject matter in light of Minogue 's experiences with breast cancer . X and the lead single , " 2 Hearts " entered at number one on the Australian albums and singles charts respectively . In the United Kingdom , X initially attracted lukewarm sales , although its commercial performance eventually improved . Follow @-@ up singles from the album , " In My Arms " and " Wow " , both peaked inside the top ten of the UK Singles Chart . In the US , the album was nominated at the 2009 Grammy Awards for Best Electronic / Dance Album . 
 As part of the promotion of her album , Minogue was featured in White Diamond , a documentary filmed during 2006 and 2007 as she resumed her Showgirl Homecoming Tour . She also appeared in The Kylie Show , which featured her performances as well as comedy sketches with Mathew Horne , Dannii Minogue , Jason Donovan and Simon Cowell . She co @-@ starred in the 2007 Doctor Who Christmas special episode , " Voyage of the Damned " , as Astrid Peth . The episode was watched by 13 @.@ 31 million viewers , which was the show 's highest viewing figure since 1979 . 
 In May 2008 , Minogue embarked on the European leg of the KylieX2008 tour , her most expensive tour to date with production costs of £ 10 million . The tour was generally acclaimed and sold well . She was then appointed a Chevalier of the French Ordre des Arts et des Lettres , the junior grade of France 's highest cultural honour . In July , she was officially invested by The Prince of Wales as an Officer of the Order of the British Empire . She also won the " Best International Female Solo Artist " award at the 2008 BRIT Awards . In September , she made her Middle East debut as the headline act at the opening of Atlantis , The Palm , an exclusive hotel resort in Dubai , and from November , she continued her KylieX2008 tour , taking the show to cities across South America , Asia and Australia . The tour visited 21 countries , and was considered a success , with ticket sales estimated at $ 70 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 In 2009 , Minogue hosted the BRIT Awards with James Corden and Mathew Horne . She then embarked on the For You , For Me tour which was her first North American concert tour . She was also featured in the Hindi movie , Blue , performing an A. R. Rahman song . 
 = = = 2010 – 12 : Aphrodite and The Abbey Road Sessions = = = 
 In July 2010 , Minogue released her eleventh studio album , Aphrodite . The album featured new songwriters and producers including Stuart Price as executive producer . Price also contributed to song writing along with Minogue , Calvin Harris , Jake Shears , Nerina Pallot , Pascal Gabriel , Lucas Secon , Keane 's Tim Rice @-@ Oxley and Kish Mauve . The album received favourable reviews from most music critics ; Rob Sheffield from Rolling Stone labelled the album Minogue 's " finest work since 1997 's underrated Impossible Princess " and Tim Sendra from Allmusic commended Minogue 's choice of collaborators and producers , commenting that the album is the " work of someone who knows exactly what her skills are and who to hire to help showcase them to perfection " . Aphrodite debuted at number @-@ one in the United Kingdom , exactly twenty two years after her first number one hit in the United Kingdom . The album 's lead single , " All the Lovers , " was a success and became her thirty @-@ third top ten single in the United Kingdom , though subsequent singles from the album , " Get Outta My Way " , " Better than Today " , and " Put Your Hands Up " , failed to reach the top ten of the UK Singles Chart . However , all the singles released from the album have topped the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart . 
 Minogue recorded a duet with synthpop duo Hurts on their song " Devotion " , which was included on the group 's album Happiness . She was then featured on Taio Cruz 's single " Higher " . The result was successful , peaking inside the top twenty in several charts and reaching number one on the US Hot Dance Club Charts . At the time , Minogue also held the third spot on the chart with " Higher " , her collaboration with British recording artist Taio Cruz , becoming the first artist to claim two of the top three spots at the same time in the American dance chart 's history . To conclude her recordings in 2010 , she released the extended play A Kylie Christmas , which included covers of Christmas songs including " Let It Snow " and " Santa Baby " . Minogue embarked on the Aphrodite : Les Folies Tour in February 2011 , travelling to Europe , North America , Asia , Australia and Africa . With a stage set inspired by the birth of the love goddess Aphrodite and Grecian culture and history , it was greeted with positive reviews from critics , who praised the concept and the stage production . The tour was a commercial success , grossing a total of US $ 60 million and ranking at number six and twenty @-@ one on the mid year and annual Pollstar Top Concert Tours of 2011 respectively . 
 In 2012 , Minogue began a year @-@ long celebration for her 25 years in the music industry , which was often called " K25 " . The anniversary started with her embarking on the Anti Tour in England and Australia , which featured b @-@ sides , demos and rarities from her music catalogue . The tour was positively received for its intimate atmosphere and was a commercial success , grossing over two million dollars from four shows . She then released the single " Timebomb " in May , the greatest hits compilation album , The Best of Kylie Minogue in June and the singles box @-@ set , K25 Time Capsule in October . She performed at various events around the world , including Sydney Mardi Gras , Queen Elizabeth II 's Diamond Jubilee Concert , and BBC Proms in the Park London 2012 . Minogue released the compilation album , The Abbey Road Sessions in October . The album contained reworked and orchestral versions of her previous songs . It was recorded at London 's Abbey Road Studios and was produced by Steve Anderson and Colin Elliot . The album received favourable reviews from music critics and debuted at number @-@ two in the United Kingdom . The album spawned two singles , " Flower " and " On a Night Like This " . 
 Minogue returned to acting and starred in two films : a cameo appearance in the American independent film Jack & Diane and a lead role in the French film Holy Motors . Jack & Diane opened at the Tribeca Film Festival on 20 April 2012 , while Holy Motors opened at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival , which Minogue attended . 
 = = = 2013 – present : Kiss Me Once and Kylie Christmas = = = 
 In January 2013 , Minogue and her manager Terry Blamey , whom she had worked with since the start of her singing career , parted ways . The following month , she signed to Roc Nation for a management deal . In September , she was featured on Italian singer @-@ songwriter Laura Pausini 's single " <unk> " , which was a number @-@ one hit in Italy and received a nomination for " World 's Best Song " at the 2013 World Music Awards . In the same month , Minogue was hired as a coach for the third series of BBC One 's talent competition The Voice UK , alongside record producer and Black Eyed Peas member , will.i.am , Kaiser Chiefs ' lead singer Ricky Wilson and singer Sir Tom Jones . The show opened with 9 @.@ 35 million views from the UK , a large percentage increase from the second season . It accumulated an estimated 8 @.@ 10 million viewers on average . Minogue 's judging and personality on the show were singled out for praise . Ed Power from The Daily Telegraph gave the series premiere 3 stars , praising Minogue for being " glamorous , agreeably giggly [ and ] a card @-@ carrying national treasure " . In November , she was hired as a coach for the third season of The Voice Australia . 
 In March 2014 , Minogue released her 12th studio album , Kiss Me Once . The album featured contributions from Sia Furler , Mike Del Rio , <unk> , Pharrell Williams , MNEK and Ariel Rechtshaid . It peaked at number one in Australia and number two in the United Kingdom . The singles from the album , " Into the Blue " and " I Was Gonna Cancel " , did not chart inside the top ten of the UK Singles Chart , peaking at number 12 and number 59 respectively . In August , Minogue performed a seven song set at the closing ceremony of the 2014 Commonwealth Games , donning a custom Jean Paul Gaultier corset . In September , she embarked on the Kiss Me Once Tour . 
 In January 2015 , Minogue appeared as a guest vocalist on Giorgio Moroder 's single " Right Here , Right Now " providing her 12th number one hit on the U.S. Dance Chart on April 18 , 2015 . In March , Minogue 's contract with Parlophone Records ended , leaving her future music releases with Warner Music Group in Australia and New Zealand . The same month , she parted ways with Roc Nation " to take more control over her career . " In April , Minogue played tech reporter Shauna in a two episode arc on the ABC Family series , Young & Hungry . Minogue also appeared as Susan Riddick in the disaster film San Andreas , released in May and starring Dwayne Johnson and Carla Gugino . In September 2015 , an extended play with Fernando Garibay titled Kylie + Garibay was released . Garibay and Giorgio Moroder served as producers for the extended play . In November , Minogue was a featured artist on the track , " The Other Boys " by Nervo , alongside Jake Shears and Nile Rodgers . This became her thirteenth chart topper on the U.S Dance Chart , lifting her position in the list of artists with the most U.S. Dance Chart number ones to equal 8th alongside Whitney Houston , Enrique Iglesias and Lady Gaga . 
 In December 2015 , Minogue was the guest on BBC Radio 4 's Desert Island Discs . Her choices included " Dancing Queen " by ABBA , " Purple Rain " by Prince and " Need You Tonight " by INXS . Minogue released her first Christmas album , Kylie Christmas in November 2015 . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 Minogue has been known for her soft soprano vocal range . Dara Hickey reviewed Minogue 's studio album Aphrodite and wrote that she is " singing in her highest vocal range ever . " According to Fiona MacDonald from Madison magazine , Kylie " has never shied away from making some brave but questionable artistic decisions " . 
 In musical terms , Minogue has worked with many genres in pop and dance music . However , her signature music has been contemporary disco music . Her first studio albums with Stock , Aitken , and Waterman present a more bubblegum pop influence , with many critics comparing her to American recording artist Madonna . Chris True from Allmusic , reviewed her debut Kylie and found her music " standard late- ' 80s Stock @-@ Aitken @-@ Waterman bubblegum " , however he stated that she presented the most personality of any 1980s recording artist . He said of her third album Rhythm of Love , from the early 1990s , " The songwriting is stronger , the production dynamic , and Kylie seems more confident vocally . " At the time of her third studio album , " She began to trade in her cutesy , bubblegum pop image for a more mature one , and in turn , a more sexual one . " Chris True stated that during her relationship with Michael Hutchence , " her shedding of the near @-@ virginal façade that dominated her first two albums , began to have an effect , not only on how the press and her fans treated her , but in the evolution of her music . " 
 From Minogue 's work on her sixth studio album , Impossible Princess , her songwriting and musical content began to change . She was constantly writing down words , exploring the form and meaning of sentences . She had written lyrics before , but called them " safe , just neatly rhymed words and that 's that " . The album , in musical genres , varied from her previous efforts as it incorporated " dance @-@ pop " and " trip hop " music . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine said that the album bears a resemblance to Madonna 's Ray of Light . He said that she took inspiration from " both the Brit @-@ pop and electronica movements of the mid- ' 90s " , saying that " Impossible Princess is the work of an artist willing to take risks " . Her next effort , Light Years , he said was " worked up by the renaissance of pure dance @-@ pop that was the order of the day at the onset of the 21st century . " Her ninth album Body Language was quite different from her musical experiments in the past as it was a " successful " attempt at broadening her sound with electro and hip @-@ hop for instance . Incorporating styles of dance music with funk , disco and R & B , the album was listed on Q 's " Best Albums of 2003 " . 
 Minogue 's tenth record X was a move back to her pop roots . In a press interview for the promotion of the album , she stated that the album was " mainly electropop " and was a " celebration for me to be back working . " However , critics said the album did not feature enough " consistency " and Chris True called the tracks " cold , calculated dance @-@ pop numbers . " However , he said her eleventh album Aphrodite " rarely strays past sweet love songs or happy dance anthems " and " the main sound is the kind of glittery disco pop that really is her strong suit . " Tim Sendra from Allmusic stated , " The various producers keep their eyes on the dancefloor throughout , crafting shiny and sleek tracks that sound custom @-@ built to blast out of huge speaker columns " and found Aphrodite " One of her best , in fact . " 
 = = Public image = = 
 Minogue 's efforts to be taken seriously as a recording artist were initially hindered by the perception that she had not " paid her dues " and was no more than a manufactured pop star exploiting the image she had created during her stint on Neighbours . Minogue acknowledged this viewpoint , saying , " If you 're part of a record company , I think to a degree it 's fair to say that you 're a manufactured product . You 're a product and you 're selling a product . It doesn 't mean that you 're not talented and that you don 't make creative and business decisions about what you will and won 't do and where you want to go . " 
 In 1993 , Baz Luhrmann introduced Minogue to photographer Bert Stern , notable for his work with Marilyn Monroe . Stern photographed her in Los Angeles and , comparing her to Monroe , commented that Minogue had a similar mix of vulnerability and eroticism . Throughout her career , Minogue has chosen photographers who attempt to create a new " look " for her , and the resulting photographs have appeared in a variety of magazines , from the cutting edge The Face to the more traditionally sophisticated Vogue and Vanity Fair , making the Minogue face and name known to a broad range of people . Stylist William Baker has suggested that this is part of the reason she entered mainstream pop culture in Europe more successfully than many other pop singers who concentrate solely on selling records . 
 By 2000 , Minogue was considered to have achieved a degree of musical credibility for having maintained her career longer than her critics had expected . Her progression from the wholesome " girl next door " to a more sophisticated performer with a flirtatious and playful persona attracted new fans . Her " Spinning Around " video led to some media outlets referring to her as " <unk> " , and sex became a stronger element in her subsequent videos . William Baker described her status as a sex symbol as a " double edged sword " , observing that " we always attempted to use her sex appeal as an enhancement of her music and to sell a record . But now it has become in danger of eclipsing what she actually is : a pop singer . " After 20 years as a performer , Minogue was described as a fashion " trend @-@ setter " and a " style icon who constantly reinvents herself " . She has been acknowledged for mounting successful tours and for worldwide record sales of more than 70 million . 
 Minogue has been inspired by and compared to Madonna throughout her career . Her producer , Pete Waterman , recalled Minogue during the early years of her success with the observation : " She was setting her sights on becoming the new Prince or Madonna ... What I found amazing was that she was outselling Madonna four to one , but still wanted to be her . " Minogue received negative comments that her Rhythm of Love tour in 1991 was too similar visually to Madonna 's Blond Ambition World Tour , for which critics labelled her a Madonna wannabe . Kathy McCabe for The Telegraph noted that Minogue and Madonna follow similar styles in music and fashion , but concluded , " Where they truly diverge on the pop @-@ culture scale is in shock value . Minogue 's clips might draw a gasp from some but Madonna 's ignite religious and political debate unlike any other artist on the planet ... Simply , Madonna is the dark force ; Kylie is the light force . " Rolling Stone commented that , with the exception of the US , Minogue is regarded throughout the world as " an icon to rival Madonna " , saying , " Like Madonna , Minogue was not a virtuosic singer but a canny trend spotter . " Minogue has said of Madonna , " Her huge influence on the world , in pop and fashion , meant that I wasn 't immune to the trends she created . I admire Madonna greatly but in the beginning she made it difficult for artists like me , she had done everything there was to be done " , and " Madonna 's the Queen of Pop , I 'm the princess . I 'm quite happy with that . " Minogue has been declared by media as a sex symbol . 
 In January 2007 , Madame Tussauds in London unveiled its fourth waxwork of Minogue ; only Queen Elizabeth II has had more models created . During the same week a bronze cast of her hands was added to Wembley Arena 's " Square of Fame " . On 23 November 2007 , a bronze statue of Minogue was unveiled at Melbourne Docklands for permanent display . 
 In March 2010 , Minogue was declared by researchers as the " most powerful celebrity in Britain " . The study examined how marketers identify celebrity and brand partnerships . Mark Husak , head of Millward Brown 's UK media practice , said : " Kylie is widely accepted as an adopted Brit . People know her , like her and she is surrounded by positive buzz " . She was named one of the " 100 Hottest Women of All @-@ Time " by Men 's Health . In May 2011 , according to the Sunday Times Rich List , Minogue had a net worth of $ 66 million ( £ 40m ) . In April 2015 , the list was updated with her estimated earnings of £ 55 million ( AU $ 106 @.@ 61 million ) . 
 Minogue is regarded as a gay icon , which she has encouraged with comments including " I am not a traditional gay icon . There 's been no tragedy in my life , only tragic outfits " and " My gay audience has been with me from the beginning ... they kind of adopted me . " Minogue has explained that she first became aware of her gay audience in 1988 , when several drag queens performed to her music at a Sydney pub , and she later saw a similar show in Melbourne . She said that she felt " very touched " to have such an " appreciative crowd " , and this encouraged her to perform at gay venues throughout the world , as well as headlining the 1994 Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras . Minogue has one of the largest gay followings in the world . Minogue 's sister , Dannii , also has a large gay following and has been regarded as a gay icon . In September 2007 , Kylie Minogue was hailed the greatest gay icon of all time by The Sun . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Health = = = 
 Minogue was diagnosed with breast cancer at age 36 on 17 May 2005 , leading to the postponement of the remainder of her Showgirl – The Greatest Hits Tour and her withdrawal from the Glastonbury Festival . Her hospitalisation and treatment in Melbourne resulted in a brief but intense period of media coverage , particularly in Australia , where Prime Minister John Howard issued a statement of support . As media and fans began to congregate outside the Minogue residence in Melbourne , Victorian Premier Steve Bracks warned the international media that any disruption of the Minogue family 's rights under Australian privacy laws would not be tolerated . His comments became part of a wider criticism of the media 's overall reaction , with particular criticism directed towards paparazzi . 
 Minogue underwent surgery on 21 May 2005 at Cabrini Hospital in Malvern and commenced chemotherapy treatment soon after . On 8 July 2005 , she made her first public appearance after surgery when she visited a children 's cancer ward at Melbourne 's Royal Children 's Hospital . She returned to France where she completed her chemotherapy treatment at the Institut Gustave @-@ <unk> in <unk> , near Paris . In December 2005 , Minogue released a digital @-@ only single , " Over the Rainbow " , a live recording from her Showgirl tour . Her children 's book , The Showgirl Princess , written during her period of convalescence , was published in October 2006 , and her perfume , " Darling " , was launched in November . The range was later augmented by eau de <unk> including Pink Sparkle , Couture and Inverse . On her return to Australia for her concert tour , she discussed her illness and said that her chemotherapy treatment had been like " experiencing a nuclear bomb " . While appearing on The Ellen DeGeneres Show in 2008 , Minogue said that her cancer had originally been misdiagnosed . She commented , " Because someone is in a white coat and using big medical instruments doesn 't necessarily mean they 're right " , but later spoke of her respect for the medical profession . 
 Minogue was acknowledged for the impact she made by publicly discussing her cancer diagnosis and treatment ; in May 2008 , the French Cultural Minister Christine <unk> said , " Doctors now even go as far as saying there is a " Kylie effect " that encourages young women to have regular checks . " 
 Minogue is hyperglycemic . She commented in March 2015 , " ' Sugar is not my friend , I 'm hyperglycemic [ ... ] " . Minogue follows the controversial paleolithic diet and " loved all these amazing desserts that are made with avocado , almond bake , zucchini ... I love it ! " 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 Minogue has been involved in humanitarian support in areas including health research and quality of life . Musically , she has helped fundraise on many occasions . In 1989 , she participated in recording " Do They Know It 's Christmas ? " under the name Band Aid II to help raise money . In early 2010 , Minogue along with many other artists ( under the name Helping Haiti ) recorded a cover version of " Everybody Hurts " . The single was a fundraiser to help after the 2010 Haiti earthquake , with the proceeds going to both The Sun 's Helping Haiti fund and the Disasters Emergency Committee . She also spent a week in Thailand after the 2005 tsunami . During her 2011 Aphrodite World Tour , the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami struck Japan , which was on her itinerary . She declared she would continue to tour there , stating , " I was here to do shows and I chose not to cancel , Why did I choose not to cancel ? I thought long and hard about it and it wasn 't an easy decision to make . " While she was there , she and Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard were star guests at an Australian Embassy fundraiser for the disaster . 
 In 2008 , Minogue pledged her support for a campaign to raise money for abused children , to be donated to the British charities ChildLine and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children . According to the source , around $ 93 million was raised . She spoke out in relation to the cause , saying : " Finding the courage to tell someone about being abused is one of the most difficult decisions a child will ever have to make . " In 2010 and 2012 , she was involved in supporting the AIDS Support Gala , which was held by the American Foundation for Aids Research ( <unk> ) . 
 Since Minogue 's breast cancer diagnosis in 2005 , she has been a sponsor and ambassador for the cause . In May 2010 , she held a breast cancer campaign for the first time . She later spoke about the cause saying " It means so much to me to be part of this year 's campaign for Fashion Targets Breast Cancer . I wholeheartedly support their efforts to raise funds for the vital work undertaken by Breakthrough Breast Cancer . " For the cause , she " posed in a silk sheet emblazoned with the distinctive target logo of Fashion Targets Breast Cancer " for photographer Mario Testino . In 2010 , she celebrated her fifth anniversary of being clear of the disease by hosting a charity concert to raise money for cancer charities and awareness of the condition . 
 In April 2014 , Minogue had launched a new campaign entitled One Note Against Cancer , which is a charity organisation to help cancer research . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Minogue began a relationship with French actor Olivier Martinez after meeting him at the 2003 Grammy Awards ceremony . They ended their relationship in February 2007 , but remained on friendly terms . Minogue was reported to have been " saddened by false [ media ] accusations of [ Martinez 's ] disloyalty " . She defended Martinez , and acknowledged the support he had given during her treatment for breast cancer . Minogue was in a relationship with model Andrés <unk> from 2008 to 2013 . In November 2015 , Minogue confirmed she was dating British actor Joshua Sasse . On 20 February 2016 , their engagement was announced in the " Forthcoming Marriages " section of The Daily Telegraph . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In February 2012 , VH1 ranked Minogue at number 47 on their VH1 Greatest Women in Music and number 49 on the " 50 Greatest Women of the Video Era " . Channel 4 listed her as one of the world 's greatest pop stars . The Official Chart Company revealed that she is the 12th best selling singer in the United Kingdom to date , and the third best selling female artist , selling over 10 @.@ 1 million sales . According to the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , all her studio albums have been certified , and with her singles as well , she has a total of 27 certified records . In January 2011 , She received a Guinness World Records citation for having the most consecutive decades with top five albums , with all her albums doing so . In September , she was ranked 27 on VH1 's " 100 Sexiest Artists " . In 2008 , she was honoured with Music Industry Trust 's award for recognition of her 20 @-@ year career and was hailed as " an icon of pop and style " , becoming the first female musician or act to receive a Music Industry Trust award . Minogue made history in the United States for having two songs inside the top three on the US Dance Club Songs chart , with her songs " Better than Today " and " Higher " charting at one and three , respectively . She has sold more than 70 million records worldwide . 
 Dino Scatena from <unk> wrote that " A quarter of a century ago , a sequence of symbiotic events altered the fabric of Australian popular culture and set in motion the transformation of a 19 @-@ year @-@ old soap actor from Melbourne into an international pop icon . " He then stated " Who could have imagined this tiny , unsophisticated star of Neighbours , with the bad ' 80s perm and questionable vocal ability , would go on to become Australia 's single most successful entertainer and a world @-@ renowned style idol ? " Throughout her career , Minogue has been known for reinventing herself in fashion and musical content . Fabulous Magazine labelled her a " Master of Reinvention . " In November 2006 , Minogue posed for Vogue Australia , with Larissa Dubecki from The Age labelling her the " Mother of Reinvention " by saying " This unveiling is as cleverly managed as every aspect of her career , and her illness , to date . Like sharks , celebrities cannot remain static ; they must keep moving or die . Kylie has beaten her early detractors by inhabiting almost a dozen identities [ ... ] " Fiona MacDonald from Madison said Kylie was " an icon , one of the handful of singers recognised around the world by her first name alone . And yet despite becoming an international music superstar , style icon and honorary Brit , those two syllables still seem as Australian as the smell of eucalyptus or a barbeque on a hot day . " 
 Minogue 's hits have <unk> many accolades throughout her career . In January 2012 , NME listed her worldwide hit single " Can 't Get You Out of My Head " at number 4 on their Greatest Pop Songs in History . The song was also named the most @-@ played track of the decade . The song eventually became the 3rd best @-@ selling UK single and the most @-@ played song in the UK in 2001 . As of 2012 , " Can 't Get You Out of My Head " was the 72nd song featured on UK 's Official Top 100 Biggest Selling Singles of All Time . Her single " Spinning Around " has also been iconic to Minogue 's career , mostly due to her iconic hot pants , with critics calling the music video " excellent tabloid fodder " and a trademark to her career . Her song " Come into My World " won a Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording in 2004 . Slant Magazine placed the video for " Come into My World " at number 1 on their " Best of the Aughts : Music Videos " list . In 2007 , French avant @-@ garde guitarist Noël <unk> released So Lucky , featuring solo guitar versions of tunes recorded by Minogue . 
 Minogue has been recognised with a number of honorific nicknames . She has been compared to American recording artist Madonna in many media outlets , with Madonna identified as Queen of Pop and Minogue as the Princess of Pop . Birmingham Post said in 2000 ; " [ o ] nce upon a time , long before anybody had even heard of Britney , Christina , Jessica or Mandy , Australian singer Kylie Minogue ruled the charts as princess of pop . Back in 1988 her first single , I Should Be So Lucky , spent five weeks at number one , making her the most successful female artist in the UK charts with 13 successive Top 10 entries . " She is sometimes referred to as the Goddess of Pop / Pop Goddess . She has also been dubbed a Disco Queen . William Baker , co @-@ author of her book Kylie : La La La , talking about her song " Better the Devil You Know " , commented , " The track transferred well onto the dance @-@ floor and heralded a long reign for Kylie as the new queen of disco ... a pop princess . " Jon O 'Brien from Allmusic reviewed her box @-@ set Kylie : The Albums 2000 – 2010 and stated " Kylie has yet to make that one essential album , and the going @-@ through @-@ the @-@ motions nature of her later releases suggests her time may have passed , but this box set still contains plenty of moments to justify her position as one of the all @-@ time premier pop princesses . " In November 2011 , on the twenty @-@ fifth anniversary of the ARIA Music Awards , she was inducted by the Australian Recording Industry Association into the ARIA Hall of Fame . 
 Many celebrities have named Minogue as a role model . Many media outlets have said many people , particularly woman , have undergone regular checks for cancer symptoms since her breast cancer diagnosis . In December 2006 , Sugar named her the Most Inspirational Celebrity as voted by teenage girls . Editor of the magazine Annabel Brog stated , " [ Kylie ] couldn 't be any more inspirational . She 's friendly , gorgeous , talented – and this year she 's shown just how strong she is too . " American singer and songwriter Lady Gaga thanked her on Twitter , citing her as " a supportive female . " Television host Giuliana Rancic cited Minogue 's cancer story as " inspirational " when she too was diagnosed with cancer . She said , " When you get diagnosed , you don 't know what to do … you Google . I went online and I read your story , and it gave me the strength to go public as well . " Many musical entertainers have cited Minogue as an influence including September , Sarah Michelle Gellar , Katy Perry , Destiny 's Child , Marilyn Manson , Madonna , Natasha Bedingfield and Lady Gaga . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Kylie ( 1988 ) 
 Enjoy Yourself ( 1989 ) 
 Rhythm of Love ( 1990 ) 
 Let 's Get to It ( 1991 ) 
 Kylie Minogue ( 1994 ) 
 Impossible Princess ( 1997 ) 
 Light Years ( 2000 ) 
 Fever ( 2001 ) 
 Body Language ( 2003 ) 
 X ( 2007 ) 
 Aphrodite ( 2010 ) 
 Kiss Me Once ( 2014 ) 
 Kylie Christmas ( 2015 ) 
 = = Tours and concerts = = 
 Disco in Dream ( 1989 ) 
 Enjoy Yourself Tour ( 1990 ) 
 Rhythm of Love Tour ( 1991 ) 
 Let 's Get to It Tour ( 1991 ) 
 Intimate and Live ( 1998 ) 
 On a Night Like This ( 2001 ) 
 KylieFever2002 ( 2002 ) 
 Showgirl : The Greatest Hits Tour ( 2005 ) 
 Showgirl : The Homecoming Tour ( 2006 – 07 ) 
 KylieX2008 ( 2008 – 09 ) 
 For You , For Me ( 2009 ) 
 Aphrodite World Tour ( 2011 ) 
 Anti Tour ( 2012 ) 
 Kiss Me Once Tour ( 2014 – 15 ) 
 Kylie Summer 2015 ( 2015 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Andrew I of Hungary = 
 Andrew I the White or the Catholic ( Hungarian : I. Fehér or <unk> András or Endre ; c . 1015 – <unk> , before 6 December 1060 ) was King of Hungary from 1046 to 1060 . He descended from a younger branch of the Árpád dynasty . After spending fifteen years in exile , he ascended the throne during an extensive revolt of the pagan Hungarians . He strengthened the position of Christianity in the Kingdom of Hungary and successfully defended its independence against the Holy Roman Empire . 
 His efforts to ensure the succession of his son , Solomon , resulted in the open revolt of his brother , Béla . Béla dethroned Andrew by force in 1060 . Andrew suffered severe injuries during the fighting and died before his brother was crowned king . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood ( c . 1015 – 1031 ) = = = 
 Medieval sources provide two contradictory reports of the parents of Andrew , and his two brothers , Levente and Béla . For instance , the Chronicle of Zagreb and Saint Gerard 's Life write that their father was Vazul , a grandson of Taksony , Grand Prince of the Hungarians ( r. c . 955 – c . 970 ) . The Illuminated Chronicle and other medieval sources write of Vazul 's relationship with " some girl " from the Tátony clan who bore his sons , who thus " were not born of a true marriage @-@ bed " . According to a concurrent tradition , which has been preserved by most chronicles , the three princes were the sons of Vazul 's brother , Ladislas the Bald . Modern historians , who reject the latter report , agree that Andrew and his brothers were the sons of Vazul and his concubine from the Tátony clan . According to the historian Gyula Kristó , Andrew was the second among Vazul 's three sons . He writes that Andrew was born around 1015 . 
 = = = In exile ( 1031 – 1046 ) = = = 
 According to medieval chronicles , Vazul was blinded during the reign of his cousin , King Stephen I , the first Christian monarch of Hungary ( r . 997 – 1038 ) . The king ordered Vazul 's mutilation after the death , in 1031 , of Emeric , his only son surviving infancy . The contemporary Annals of Altaich writes that the king himself ordered the mutilation of one of his kinsmen , who had strong claim to the throne , in an attempt to ensure a peaceful succession to his own sister 's son , Peter Orseolo . The same source adds that the king expelled his blinded cousin 's three sons from Hungary . According to the contrasting report of the Hungarian chronicles , King Stephen wanted to save the young princes ' lives from their enemies in the royal court and " counselled them with all speed " to depart from Hungary . 
 Having his own son died in his father 's life , and having no other sons , Stephen , the king of good memory , who was the maternal uncle of [ Peter Orseolo ] , adopted and appointed him as heir to his kingdom . For his kinsman 's son disagreed with him on this , [ Stephen ] had him blinded , even if he was worthier of the kingdom , and sent his little sons into exile . 
 Exiled from Hungary , Andrew and his brothers settled in the court of Duke Oldřich of Bohemia ( r . 1012 – 1033 ) . Here they came across King Mieszko II of Poland ( r . 1025 – 1031 , 1032 – 1034 ) who likewise took refuge in Bohemia after his opponents had expelled him from his kingdom . The Polish monarch regained his crown and returned to Poland in 1032 . Andrew , Béla and Levente , whose " condition of life was poor and mean " in Bohemia , followed Mieszko II who received them " kindly and honourably " in Poland . After the youngest among them , Béla , married a daughter of Mieszko II , Andrew and Levente decided to depart from Poland , because they " felt that they would be living in Poland under their brother 's shadow " , according to Simon of Kéza . 
 Hungarian chronicles have preserved a story full of fabulous or anachronistic details of the two brothers ' ensuing wanderings . For instance , they narrate that Andrew and Levente were captured by Cumans , but the latter only arrived in Europe in the 1050s . Having faced many hardships , Andrew and Levente established themselves in the court of Yaroslav the Wise , Grand Prince of Kiev ( r . 1019 – 1054 ) in the late 1030s . The grand prince gave his daughter , Anastasia in marriage to Andrew . Kristó writes that Andrew , who had up to that time remained pagan , was baptized on this occasion . 
 Having received permission from [ the Polish monarch , Andrew and Levente ] left their brother [ Béla ] behind and made their way to the King of Lodomeria , who did not receive them . Since they had nowhere to lay their head , they went from there to the [ Cumans ] . Seeing that they were persons of excellent bearing , the [ Cumans ] thought that they had come to spy out the land , and unless a captive Hungarian had recognized them , they should certainly have killed them ; but they kept them with them for some time . Then they departed thence to Russia . 
 = = = Return to Hungary ( 1046 ) = = = 
 In the meantime , King Peter Orseolo , who had succeeded King Stephen in Hungary in 1038 , alienated many lords and prelates from himself , especially when he solemnly recognized the suzerainty of the Holy Roman Emperor , Henry III in 1045 . According to the Illuminated Chronicle , the discontented lords , " seeing the sufferings of their people " , assembled in Csanád ( Cenad , Romania ) . They agreed to send envoys to Andrew and Levente to Kiev in order to persuade them to return to Hungary . Fearing " some treacherous ambush " , the two brothers only set out after the agents they had sent to Hungary confirmed that the Hungarians were ripe for an uprising against the king . 
 By the time the two brothers decided to return , a revolt had broken out in Hungary . It was dominated by pagans who captured many clergymen and mercilessly slaughtered them . Andrew and Levente met the rebels at Abaújvár . The Illuminated Chronicle narrates how the pagans urged the dukes " to allow the whole people to live according to the rites of the pagans , to kill the bishops and the clergy , to destroy the churches , to throw off the Christian faith and to worship idols " . The same source adds that Andrew and Levente gave in to all their demands , " for otherwise they would not fight " for them against King Peter . 
 The Annals of Altaich states that Andrew " savagely raged against the flock of the Holy Church " . Even so , Bishop Gerard of Csanád and four other prelates were ready to join Andrew , but the pagans captured and slaughtered three of them ( including Gerard ) at Buda . King Peter decided to flee from Hungary and take refugee in Austria . However , Andrew 's envoys tricked the king to return before he reached the frontier , and they captured and blinded him . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Coronation ( 1046 – 1047 ) = = = 
 Most Hungarian lords and the prelates opposed the restoration of paganism . They preferred the devout Christian Andrew to his pagan brother Levente , even if , at least according to Kristó and Steinhübel , the latter was the eldest among Vazul 's three sons . The Hungarian chronicles write that Levente , who died in short time , did not oppose his brother 's ascension to the throne . The three bishops who had survived the pagan uprising crowned Andrew in Székesfehérvár in the last quarter of 1046 or in the spring of 1047 . Historian Ferenc Makk writes that Andrew was crowned with a crown that the Byzantine Emperor Constantine IX Monomachos had sent to him . Nine enamelled plaques from this golden crown were unearthed in <unk> ( Ivanka pri Nitre , Slovakia ) in the 19th century . Andrew soon broke with his pagan supporters , restored Christianity and declared pagan rites illegal . According to <unk> , Andrew 's epithets ( the White or the Catholic ) are connected to these events . 
 Having now been made secure against all disturbances from enemies , Duke Andreas received the crown of kingship in the royal city of Alba . No more than three bishops who had escaped that great slaughter of the Christians performed the ceremony of coronation in the year of our Lord 1047 . He made proclamation to all his people that under pain of death they should lay aside the pagan rites which had formerly been permitted to them , and that they should return to the true faith of Christ and live in all things according to the law which King St Stephen had taught them . 
 = = = Wars with the Holy Roman Empire ( 1047 – 1053 ) = = = 
 The contemporaneous Hermann of Reichenau narrates that Andrew " sent frequent envoys with humble entreaties " to Emperor Henry III , proposing " an annual tribute and faithful service " if the emperor recognized his reign . Andrew persuaded his brother , Béla , to return from Poland to Hungary in 1048 . He also granted his brother one third of the kingdom with the title of duke . Béla 's duchy comprised two regions which were centered on Nyitra ( Nitra , Slovakia ) and Bihar ( Biharia , Romania ) . 
 Skirmishes on the frontier between Hungary and the Holy Roman Empire first occurred in 1050 . Emperor Henry invaded Hungary in August 1051 , but Andrew and Béla successfully applied scorched earth tactics against the imperial troops and forced them to withdraw . Legend says that the <unk> Hills near Székesfehérvár were named after the armours – <unk> in Hungarian – which were discarded by the retreating German soldiers . 
 Andrew initiated new peace negotiations with the emperor and promised to pay an annual tribute , but his offers were refused . Next summer , the emperor returned to Hungary and laid siege to Pressburg ( Bratislava , Slovakia ) . <unk> , " a most skilful swimmer " scuttled the emperor 's ships . After Pope Leo IX mediated a peace treaty , the emperor lifted the siege and withdrew from Hungary . Andrew soon refused to fulfill his promises made under duress , and even allied with Conrad I , Duke of Bavaria , a prominent opponent of Emperor Henry III . 
 Because Andreas , the king of the Hungarians was less and less inclined to send envoys and to make promises concerning a peace treaty , [ the emperor ] laid siege to the fortress of Pressburg and for a long time attacked it with various machines of war . Since , however , God aided the besieged , who anxiously called on Him , his efforts were always frustrated and he could by no means capture it . Meanwhile the lord Pope Leo had intervened at the request of Andreas to make peace and he called on the emperor to end the siege . Since [ the pope ] found [ the emperor ] in all respects in agreement with him , while discovering that Andreas on the contrary was less obedient to his advice , he was angry and threatened the latter with <unk> for mocking the apostolic see . 
 = = = Succession crisis and death ( 1053 – 1060 ) = = = 
 Andrew 's queen , Anastasia , gave birth to a son , named Solomon in 1053 . Andrew attempted to make his son 's succession secure , even against his brother , Béla , who had strong claim to succeed Andrew according to the traditional principle of seniority . 
 The brothers ' relationship did not deteriorate immediately after Solomon 's birth . In the deed of the foundation of the Tihany Abbey , a Benedictine monastery established in 1055 by Andrew , Duke Béla was listed among the lords witnessing the act . This charter , although primarily written in Latin , contains the earliest extant text – <unk> rea <unk> <unk> <unk> rea ( " on the military road which leads to <unk> " ) – written in Hungarian . Andrew also established a <unk> for Orthodox hermits in Tihany and an Orthodox monastery near Visegrád . The Third Book of Law of King Ladislaus I of Hungary ( r . 1077 – 1095 ) refers to an " estate survey of the judge <unk> " under " King Andrew and Duke Béla " . According to György Györffy , the serfs of the royal domains were registered during this survey which took place around 1056 . 
 Andrew suffered a stroke which paralyzed him . In an attempt to strengthen his son 's claim to the throne , he had the child Solomon crowned in the one @-@ year @-@ long period beginning in the autumn of 1057 . For the same purpose , Andrew also arranged the engagement of his son with Judith – a daughter of the late Emperor Henry III , and sister of the new German monarch , Henry IV ( r . 1056 – 1105 ) – in September 1058 . Thereafter , according to an episode narrated by most Hungarian chronicles , the king invited Duke Béla to a meeting at Tiszavárkony . At their meeting , Andrew seemingly offered his brother to freely choose between a crown and a sword , which were the symbols of the kingdom and the ducatus , respectively . Duke Béla , who had previously been informed by his partisans in Andrew 's court that he would be murdered on the king 's order if he opted for the crown , chose the sword . 
 However , Béla , who actually had no intention of renouncing his claim to succeed his brother in favor of his nephew , fled to Poland and sought military assistance from Duke Boleslaus II of Poland ( r . 1058 – 1079 ) . With Duke Boleslaus 's support , Béla returned to Hungary at the head of Polish troops . On the other hand , the Dowager Empress Agnes – who governed the Holy Roman Empire in the name of her minor son , Henry IV – sent Bavarian , Bohemian and Saxon troops to assist Andrew . 
 The decisive battle was fought in the regions east of the river Tisza . Andrew suffered injuries and lost the battle . He attempted to flee to the Holy Roman Empire , but his brother 's partisans routed his retinue at Moson . The Annals of <unk> narrates that wagons and horses trampled him in the battlefield . Deadly wounded in the battlefield , Andrew was seized and taken by his brother 's partisans to <unk> where " he was treated with neglect " , according to the Illuminated Chronicle . Andrew died in the royal manor there before his brother was crowned king on 6 December 1060 . Andrew was buried in the crypt of the church of the Tihany Abbey . 
 = = Family = = 
 Andrew 's wife , Anastasia , was the daughter of Grand Duke Yaroslav I the Wise of Kiev by his wife , Ingegerd , who herself was the daughter of King Olof Skötkonung of Sweden . Andrew married Anastasia , who was born in about 1020 , around 1038 . Their first child , Adelaide was born around 1040 . She became the wife of <unk> II of Bohemia , who was initially Duke and , from 1085 , King of Bohemia . Andrew and Anastasia 's first son , Solomon , was born in 1053 , their second son , David , some years later . Neither Solomon nor David fathered sons ; the male line of Andrew 's family died out with their death by the end of the 11th century . 
 King Salomon and David , his brother , never had children , and the seed of King Andreas perished with them . We believe that this was by an act of God ; for on his first return with Levente , his brother , to Hungary , Andreas with the purpose of gaining the kingdom permitted the ungodly <unk> and other most evil men to kill the saintly Gerard and many Christians . 
 Medieval chronicles write that Andrew had a natural son , named George , " by a concubine " from the village of <unk> . Since his name was popular among Orthodox believers , Gyula Kristó says that his mother may have been a Russian lady @-@ in @-@ waiting of Andrew 's queen . The theory that the Clan Drummond in Scotland was descended from George is not widely accepted by scholars . 
 The following family tree presents Andrew 's ancestry , his offspring , and some of his relatives mentioned in the article . 
 * A Khazar , Pecheneg or Volga Bulgarian lady . * * Györffy writes that she may have been a member of the Bulgarian Cometopuli dynasty . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Russian ironclad Kreml = 
 The Russian ironclad Kreml ( Russian : <unk> ) was the third and last Pervenets @-@ class broadside ironclad built for the Imperial Russian Navy during the mid @-@ 1860s . She joined the Baltic Fleet upon completion and accidentally sank a Russian frigate in 1869 . The ship was assigned to the Gunnery Training Detachment in 1870 and was frequently rearmed . Kreml sank in shallow water after a storm in 1885 ; she was refloated and returned to service . The ship was placed in reserve in 1904 and disarmed the following year before being sold for scrap in 1908 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The <unk> @-@ class ironclads were designed as coastal defence ships to protect the approaches to Saint Petersburg and were referred to as " self @-@ propelled armored floating batteries " . As such , heavy armament and protection were the most important factors in their design . 
 Kreml was 221 feet ( 67 @.@ 4 m ) long overall , with a beam of 53 feet ( 16 @.@ 2 m ) and a mean draft of 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) . Displacing 3 @,@ 664 long tons ( 3 @,@ 723 t ) at full load , she was somewhat larger than her half @-@ sisters and displaced over 300 long tons ( 300 t ) more . She was fitted with a ram bow and lacked the stern ram of her half @-@ sisters . Based on the experiences with her sister Pervenets , bilge keels 12 inches ( 305 mm ) deep and 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) long were fitted to reduce the ship 's rolling . The ship did not steer well and historian Stephen McLaughlin notes that she had " an unpredictable habit of suddenly lurching to one side or another " , probably as a result of poor water flow to the rudder . Kreml required six men to man her wheel and her total crew numbered 459 officers and enlisted men . 
 As a cost @-@ cutting measure , the ship received the refurbished horizontal trunk steam engine from the wooden frigate Ilya <unk> , built by Carr and MacPherson of Saint Petersburg . It had two cylinders , each with a bore of 83 @.@ 6 inches ( 2 @,@ 120 mm ) and a stroke of 36 inches ( 910 mm ) . Using steam produced by four rectangular fire @-@ tube boilers to drive a single 13 @-@ foot @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 4 @.@ 11 m ) propeller , the engine was designed to produce 870 indicated horsepower ( 650 kW ) and gave the ship a maximum speed of 7 @.@ 08 – 8 @.@ 93 knots ( 13 @.@ 11 – 16 @.@ 54 km / h ; 8 @.@ 15 – 10 @.@ 28 mph ) during her sea trials on 18 October 1866 . Kreml 's boilers proved to be unable to last more than about a decade in service before they had to be replaced , notably in 1876 , 1886 , 1892 and 1901 . To save money , the replacement boilers were taken from retiring ships and reconditioned before installation in Kreml . 
 The ship was intended to be rigged as a three @-@ masted schooner , like her half @-@ sisters , but her first captain suggested that her fore- and mainmasts be square rigged to take advantage of her more seaworthy hull form . Kreml 's masts were hollow iron and were used to ventilate the lower decks , the first such masts in the Imperial Russian Navy . To protect her <unk> , sailors who determined the depth of water under the keel , in combat , Kreml was fitted with two sounding tubes that led from the gun deck through the bottom of the hull . 
 Kreml was completed with 17 of the most powerful guns available to the Russians , the 7 @.@ 72 @-@ inch ( 196 mm ) 60 @-@ pounder smoothbore gun . Fifteen were mounted on the broadside and two guns were placed in pivot mounts on the upper deck to serve as chase guns . Unfortunately , it proved to be incapable of penetrating 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) of wrought iron armor at a distance of only 200 yards ( 183 m ) during trials in 1859 – 60 . Despite this , the ship continued to be armed with varying numbers of these guns , as well as 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) rifled guns throughout her career . Her upper deck armament changed even more frequently and used different configurations of 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) and 8 @-@ inch rifled guns in addition to varying numbers of smaller guns . 
 The ship 's armor configuration differed from that of her half @-@ sisters . Most of her side was covered by 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 110 mm ) of wrought @-@ iron armor , but transverse armored bulkheads of the same thickness protected the gun deck from raking fire and the upper part of the hull outside the bulkheads was unprotected . The teak backing of the armor was increased to 15 inches ( 381 mm ) . Kreml 's deck had a maximum thickness of 1 @.@ 14 inches ( 29 mm ) . The conning tower was also protected by 4 @.@ 5 inches of armor . The ship 's hull was divided by four watertight transverse and two longitudinal bulkheads for protection against underwater damage . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Kreml , named after the Kremlin , was ordered on 20 April 1863 when a contract was signed with the Russian shipbuilder Semiannikov & Poletika for a total cost of 898 @,@ 000 rubles . Construction had not yet begun when the Russian Admiralty Board amended the contract on 20 July to shorten the construction time by one year for a payment of an extra 48 @,@ 000 rubles in response to the adverse foreign reaction to the brutal Russian suppression of the revolts in Poland and Lithuania that year . Fearing attack by Britain and France , the Board switched priority to the smaller Uragan @-@ class monitors shortly afterwards in the belief that they could be completed more quickly so that progress on Kreml slowed to a crawl once construction began on 2 October . The ship was not formally laid down until 23 December and she was launched on 26 August 1865 . 
 The ship entered service in 1866 with the Baltic Fleet . She accidentally collided with and sank the wooden steam frigate Oleg on 15 August 1869 , killing 16 men from Oleg , but Kreml was only slightly damaged . She was assigned to the Gunnery Training Detachment in March 1870 and remained with it for the bulk of her career . In November 1881 , the steam @-@ powered steering gear taken from the ironclad Petr Veliky was installed which required the installation of a high @-@ pressure donkey boiler in the cramped boiler room . This proved to be more trouble than it was worth and was removed two years later . Kreml was caught by a storm on 10 June 1885 while sailing for Reval ( Tallinn ) and began taking on so much water that her captain decided to make for shallow water ; she reached Kunda Bay , on the Estonian coast , under sail alone after her engine bearings overheated and forced the engine to be stopped . Once there , the progressive flooding continued through the ventilation shafts , sounding tubes , and defective valves in the internal bulkheads , and the ship sank in 26 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) of water . Kreml was refloated on five days later and repaired in Kronstadt . She was reclassified as coast @-@ defense ironclad on 13 February 1892 and placed in reserve on 24 December 1904 . Kreml was disarmed and turned over to the Port of Kronstadt for disposal on 15 September 1905 . She was stricken from the Navy List on 12 October and sold for scrap on 8 September 1908 . 
 = Seorsumuscardinus = 
 Seorsumuscardinus is a genus of fossil dormice from the early Miocene of Europe . It is known from zone MN 4 ( see MN zonation ) in Oberdorf , Austria ; Karydia , Greece ; and Tägernaustrasse @-@ Jona , Switzerland , and from zone MN 5 in a single site at Affalterbach , Germany . The MN 4 records are placed in the species S. alpinus and the sole MN 5 record is classified as the species S. bolligeri . The latter was placed in a separate genus , Heissigia , when it was first described in 2007 , but it was reclassified as a second species of Seorsumuscardinus in 2009 . 
 The two species of Seorsumuscardinus are known from isolated teeth , which show that they were medium @-@ sized dormice with flat teeth . The teeth are all characterized by long transverse crests coupled with shorter ones . One of these crests , the anterotropid , distinguishes the two species , as it is present in the lower molars of S. alpinus , but not in those of S. bolligeri . Another crest , the centroloph , reaches the outer margin of the first upper molar in S. bolligeri , but not in S. alpinus . Seorsumuscardinus may be related to Muscardinus , the genus of the living hazel dormouse , which appears at about the same time , and the older <unk> . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In 1992 , Thomas Bolliger described some teeth of Seorsumuscardinus from the Swiss locality of Tägernaustrasse ( MN 4 ; early Miocene , see MN zonation ) as an indeterminate dormouse ( family Gliridae ) perhaps related to <unk> . Six years later , Hans de Bruijn named the new genus and species Seorsumuscardinus alpinus on the basis of material from Oberdorf in Austria ( also MN 4 ) and included fossils from Tägernaustrasse and from Karydia in Greece ( MN 4 ) in Seorsumuscardinus . In 2007 , Jerome Prieto and Madeleine Böhme named Heissigia bolligeri as a new genus and species from Affalterbach in Bavaria ( MN 5 , younger than MN 4 ) , and referred the Tägernaustrasse material to it , but failed to compare their new genus to Seorsumuscardinus . Two years later , Prieto published a note to compare the two and concluded that they were referable to the same genus , but different species . Thus , the genus Seorsumuscardinus now includes the species Seorsumuscardinus alpinus from MN 4 and S. bolligeri from MN 5 . Prieto provisionally placed the Tägernaustrasse material with S. alpinus . He also mentioned <unk> <unk> , a name given to a single upper molar from the middle Miocene of Hungary , which is now lost . Although the specimen shows some similarities with Seorsumuscardinus , published illustrations are too poor to confirm the identity of <unk> , and Prieto considered the latter name to be an unidentifiable nomen dubium . 
 Because of its derived and specialized morphology , the relationships of Seorsumuscardinus are obscure . However , it shows some similarities with Muscardinus , a genus which includes the living hazel dormouse , and may share a common ancestor with it , such as the earlier fossil genus <unk> . All three are part of the dormouse family , which includes many extinct forms dating back to the early Eocene ( around 50 million years ago ) , as well as a smaller array of living species . The generic name Seorsumuscardinus combines the Latin <unk> , which means " different " , with Muscardinus and the specific name alpinus refers to the occurrence of S. alpinus close to the Alps . Heissigia honored paleontologist Kurt <unk> for his work in Bavaria on the occasion of his 65th birthday and bolligeri honors Thomas Bolliger for his early description of material of this dormouse . 
 = = Description = = 
 Only the cheek teeth of Seorsumuscardinus are known ; these include the fourth premolar and three molars in the upper ( maxilla ) and lower jaws ( mandible ) . The teeth are medium @-@ sized for a dormouse and have a flat occlusal ( chewing ) surface . S. bolligeri is slightly larger than S. alpinus . 
 = = = Upper dentition = = = 
 The fourth upper premolar ( P4 ) has four main , transversely placed crests ; the description of S. bolligeri mentions an additional , centrally placed small crest . De Bruijn interpreted the four main crests as the anteroloph , protoloph , metaloph , and posteroloph from front to back and wrote that these crests are not connected on the sides of the tooth . Prieto and Böhme note that the posteroloph is convex on the back margin of the tooth . In Muscardinus , the number of ridges on P4 ranges from five in Muscardinus <unk> to two in M. pliocaenicus and the living hazel dormouse , but the protoloph and metaloph are always connected on the lingual ( inner ) side of the tooth . P4 is two @-@ rooted in S. alpinus and three @-@ rooted in S. bolligeri . 
 The first upper molar ( M1 ) was described as square by De Bruijn and as rounded by Prieto and Böhme . There are five main transverse crests , which are mostly isolated , but some may be connected on the borders of the teeth . The middle crest , the centroloph , reaches to the labial ( outer ) margin in the single known M1 of S. bolligeri , but does not in any of the five M1 of S. alpinus . The front crest , the anteroloph , is less distinct in S. bolligeri than most S. alpinus , but one M1 of S. alpinus is similar to that of S. bolligeri . M1 has three roots in S. alpinus , but the number of roots in S. bolligeri is not known . 
 Prieto and Böhme describe M2 as less rounded than M1 and De Bruijn notes that the crests are more parallel . In addition to the five main crests , small crests are present in front of and behind the centroloph that do not cover the full width of the tooth . In one S. bolligeri M2 , there is a small crest on the lingual side in front of the centroloph , but such a crest does not occur in any S. alpinus . Another M2 of S. bolligeri has this crest on the labial side . On the other hand , all five M2 of S. alpinus have a minor crest on the labial side behind the centroloph . In two M2 of S. alpinus , the centroloph and the metaloph are connected by a longitudinal crest , which is never present in S. bolligeri . There are three roots . 
 M3 is known from a single specimen each from Oberdorf , Affalterbach , and Tägernaustrasse . In addition to the main crests , there are two or three additional smaller crests . The roots are unknown . 
 = = = Lower dentition = = = 
 The fourth lower premolar ( p4 ) is known from a poorly preserved specimen from Oberdorf and a less worn specimen from Tägernaustrasse . There are four ridges , of which the front and back pair are connected at the lingual side and in the Oberdorf specimen also at the labial side . This tooth is similar to that of Muscardinus <unk> , but the front pair is better developed . There is one root . 
 The first lower molar ( m1 ) bears four main crests and a smaller one between the two crests at the back . An additional crest ( the anterotropid ) is present between the two front crests , the anterolophid and the metalophid , in S. alpinus , but not in S. bolligeri . The occlusal pattern of m2 resembles that of m1 . S. bolligeri also lacks an anterotropid on m2 , but the tooth is not known from Oberdorf . In a worn m2 from Tägernaustrasse , there is a thickened portion in the labial part of the anterolophid , which Prieto interpreted as a remnant of the anterotropid ; this led him to identify the Tägernaustrasse population as S. cf. alpinus . Only Oberdorf has yielded the m3 of Seorsumuscardinus . It resembles the m1 and has a short anterotropid , but has more oblique crests . In S. alpinus , the lower molars have two and occasionally three roots . The roots of the m1 of S. bolligeri are not preserved and the m2 has two roots . 
 = = Range = = 
 In MN 4 , Seorsumuscardinus has been recorded from Oberdorf , Austria ( sites 3 and 4 , which yielded 6 and 17 Seorsumuscardinus alpinus teeth , respectively ) ; Karydia , Greece ( S. alpinus ) ; and Tägernaustrasse , Switzerland ( 5 teeth ; S. cf. alpinus ) . Affalterbach , Germany , where 10 teeth of S. bolligeri were found , is the only known MN 5 locality . In all these localities , it is part of a diverse dormouse fauna . Because the distributions of the two known species are temporally distinct , Prieto suggested that the genus may be useful for biostratigraphy ( the use of fossils to determine the age of deposits ) . Seorsumuscardinus occurred at the same time as the oldest known Muscardinus . 
 = HMS Aurora ( 1887 ) = 
 HMS Aurora was one of seven Orlando @-@ class armoured cruisers built for the Royal Navy in the mid @-@ 1880s . The ship spent a brief time in reserve before she was assigned to the Channel Squadron for two years in 1890 . In 1893 Aurora became a coast guard ship in Ireland for two years before she was placed in reserve again . The ship recommissioned in 1899 for service on the China Station and some of her crew participated in the Battle of Tientsin in 1900 during the Boxer Rebellion . Aurora returned home two years later and was again reduced to reserve . She was taken out of service in 1905 and sold for scrap on 2 October 1907 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Orlando @-@ class cruisers were enlarged versions of the Mersey class with more armour and a more powerful armament . Like their predecessors , they were intended to protect British shipping . Aurora had a length between perpendiculars of 300 feet ( 91 @.@ 4 m ) , a beam of 56 feet ( 17 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) . Designed to displace 5 @,@ 040 long tons ( 5 @,@ 120 t ) , all of the Orlando @-@ class ships proved to be overweight and displaced approximately 5 @,@ 535 long tons ( 5 @,@ 624 t ) . The ships were powered by a pair of three @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , which were designed to produce a total of 8 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 6 @,@ 300 kW ) and a maximum speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) using steam provided by four boilers with forced draught . The ship carried a maximum of 900 long tons ( 910 t ) of coal which was designed to give her a range of 8 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 000 km ; 9 @,@ 200 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 484 officers and enlisted men . 
 Aurora 's main armament consisted of two breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 234 mm ) Mk V guns , one gun fore and aft of the superstructure on pivot mounts . Her secondary armament was ten BL 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns , five on each broadside . Protection against torpedo boats was provided by six quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 6 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns and ten QF 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns , most of which were mounted on the main deck in broadside positions . The ship was also armed with six 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) torpedo tubes : four on the broadside above water and one each in the bow and stern below water . 
 The ship was protected by a waterline compound armour belt 10 inches ( 254 mm ) thick . It covered the middle 200 feet ( 61 @.@ 0 m ) of the ship and was 5 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) high . Because the ship was overweight , the top of the armour belt was 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) below the waterline when she was fully loaded . The ends of the armour belt were closed off by transverse bulkheads 16 inches ( 406 mm ) . The lower deck was 2 – 3 inches ( 51 – 76 mm ) thick over the full length of the hull . The conning tower was protected by 12 inches ( 305 mm ) of armour . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Aurora , named for the eponymous Roman goddess of the dawn , was the eighth ship of her name to serve in the Royal Navy . She was laid down on 1 February 1886 by Pembroke Dockyard . The ship was launched on 28 October 1887 by Mrs. Sophia Morant , wife of Captain George Morant , Captain @-@ Superintendent of the dockyard and completed in July 1889 at a cost of £ 258 @,@ 390 . 
 Aurora went straight into reserve at Devonport after completion , but was commissioned for service with the Channel Squadron in 1890 – 92 . She was transferred to Bantry , Ireland , in 1893 to serve as the local coastguard ship until 1895 . That year the ship was reassigned to the Devonport Reserve and remained there until 1899 . Aurora participated in Queen Victoria 's Diamond Jubilee Fleet review on 26 June 1897 at Spithead . 
 Aurora was recommissioned for service in the Far East in 1899 under the command of Captain Edward Bayly and some of her crew , including Bayly , took part in the Battle of Tientsin in July 1900 during the Boxer Rebellion . In early February 1902 she was ordered to leave , homebound , arriving at Aden on 3 March , at Malta 17 March , and at Plymouth on 26 March . Officers and crew received the China War Medal ( 1900 ) on 15 April , before she paid off at Devonport two days later . Aurora was refitted in Clydebank upon her return and was placed in Devonport Reserve in 1904 before she was taken out of service the following year . The ship was sold for scrap to Payton , of Milford Haven , Wales , on 2 October 1907 . 
 = Maxim Lapierre = 
 Maxim Lapierre ( born March 29 , 1985 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey forward currently playing for the HC Lugano of the NLA . Drafted out of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League ( QMJHL ) , he was selected 61st overall in 2003 by the Montreal Canadiens . He spent parts of his first three professional seasons with the Canadiens ' minor league affiliate , the Hamilton Bulldogs of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) before playing his first full NHL season in 2008 – 09 . 
 Lapierre spent five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half seasons in the Canadiens organization before being traded to the Anaheim Ducks in December 2010 . Two months later , he was again traded , moving to the Vancouver Canucks , and helped the team to the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals , where they lost to the Boston Bruins . On July 5 , 2013 , Lapierre signed with the St. Louis Blues as a free agent . On January 27 , 2015 , Lapierre was traded from St. Louis to the Pittsburgh Penguins in exchange for Marcel Goc . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lapierre was born in Saint @-@ Léonard , Quebec and grew up in <unk> , Quebec . Beginning to play hockey at age nine , Lapierre 's midget team was based out of Cap @-@ de @-@ la @-@ Madeleine , Quebec . One of his teammates , Jean @-@ François Jacques , went on to play with him on the Hamilton Bulldogs , as well . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = QMJHL = = = 
 During the 2001 – 02 season , Lapierre made his Quebec Major Junior Hockey League ( QMJHL ) debut with the Montreal Rocket , appearing in nine games , during which time he scored two goals . Playing in his first full QMJHL season in 2002 – 03 , Lapierre scored 22 goals and 43 points over 72 games . He added four points in seven playoff games . Following his rookie year in the juniors , Lapierre was selected in the second round , 61st overall , of the 2003 NHL Entry Draft by the Montreal Canadiens . Following his draft , Lapierre was returned to junior hockey early in the Canadiens ' 2003 training camp . Upon returning , his QMJHL club had relocated to Charlottetown , Prince Edward Island , to become the P.E.I. Rocket in 2003 – 04 . Lapierre recorded a junior career @-@ high 61 points over 67 games in his third season with the Rocket . Remaining in junior ranks for a fourth season in 2004 – 05 , he recorded 52 points over 69 games . 
 = = = Montreal Canadiens = = = 
 In the off @-@ season , he was signed by the Canadiens to a three @-@ year , entry @-@ level contract on July 28 , 2005 . Lapierre played his first professional season in the American Hockey League ( AHL ) with the Canadiens ' minor league affiliate , the Hamilton Bulldogs . He was called up to the NHL in November 2005 for a five @-@ day stint , playing his first NHL game on November 15 against the Florida Panthers . He registered three minutes of ice time in 4 – 3 Canadiens win , his lone NHL game during the 2005 – 06 season . In the AHL , Lapierre recorded 13 goals and 36 points over 73 games with the Bulldogs . 
 During the 2006 – 07 season , Lapierre received four separate call @-@ ups from Hamilton . Playing in the first game of a call @-@ up in December , he registered his first career NHL point in a 4 – 3 win against the Boston Bruins , earning the first assist on the game @-@ winning goal by Guillaume <unk> on December 12 , 2006 . The following game , he scored his first NHL goal in a 4 – 2 win against the Tampa Bay Lightning , tipping a Mike Komisarek shot past goaltender Marc Denis . In late @-@ January 2007 , he received his last call @-@ up of the campaign , remaining with the club until the end of the NHL regular season . Over 46 NHL games , he recorded six goals and six assists , while also tallying 24 points over 37 games in the AHL . 
 With Montreal not qualifying for the 2007 Stanley Cup playoffs , Lapierre was sent back to the Bulldogs for their 2007 playoff season . Hamilton advanced to the Calder Cup Finals , where they defeated the Hershey Bears in five games . Lapierre scored a goal and an assist in Hamilton 's 2 – 1 win in the championship @-@ deciding game . He totaled 12 points ( six goals and six assists ) in 22 playoff games . 
 After competing for a Canadiens roster spot in the 2007 NHL pre @-@ season , Lapierre was returned to the Bulldogs to start the 2007 – 08 season . On December 5 , 2007 , he was recalled to the Canadiens , earning a role as the club 's third or fourth line centre . His time with the Canadiens increased as he spent 53 games in the NHL with seven goals and 18 points , while registering 14 points over 19 games in the AHL . 
 By the 2008 – 09 campaign , Lapierre had established himself as a full @-@ time NHLer and earned a roster spot with the Canadiens out of training camp for the first time in his career . Just over a month into the season , he was elbowed in the head by opposing forward Jarkko Ruutu during a game against the Ottawa Senators on November 11 , 2008 . Lapierre was not injured on the play , while Ruutu received a two @-@ game suspension for the infraction . The following month , Lapierre recorded a Gordie Howe hat trick ( a goal , an assist and a fight ) in a 6 – 2 win against the New York Rangers on December 4 , 2008 . Later that month , on December 29 , 2008 , Lapierre recorded his first career NHL hat @-@ trick during a 5 – 2 win against the Florida Panthers . Lapierre had a career year in 2008 – 09 , finishing with 15 goals and 13 assists for 28 points over 79 games . After going scoreless in four playoff games , as the Canadiens were eliminated in the first round by the Boston Bruins , it was revealed that Lapierre had played the majority of the season in pain with an ankle injury . He underwent surgery in the off @-@ season , recovering in time for the 2009 training camp . 
 Lapierre 's offensive production decreased to 14 points in 2009 – 10 , his lowest total in the NHL since his rookie season . On March 5 , 2010 , Lapierre was suspended four games for a hit against opposing forward Scott Nichol during a game against the San Jose Sharks the previous day . Nichol left the game injured after Lapierre pushed him from behind , causing him to crash into the end boards . In addition to the suspension , Lapierre lost approximately $ 14 @,@ 000 in pay , which went to the National Hockey League Players Association ( NHLPA ) ' s emergency fund . In the 2010 playoffs , Lapierre helped the Canadiens advance to the Eastern Conference Semi @-@ finals , scoring goals in Game 6 of the first round against the Washington Capitals and the second round against the Pittsburgh Penguins , both elimination games . The Canadiens , however , were eliminated in the third round by the Philadelphia Flyers ; Lapierre finished the playoff season with three goals and one assist in 19 games . 
 = = = Anaheim and Vancouver = = = 
 After five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half seasons playing within the Canadiens organization , Lapierre was traded to the Anaheim Ducks in exchange for defenceman Brett <unk> and a fifth @-@ round draft pick in 2012 on December 31 , 2010 . He made his Ducks debut on January 5 , 2011 , in a 4 – 1 loss to the Nashville Predators . The following game , he recorded his first point as a Duck , assisting on a goal by Matt <unk> in a 6 – 0 win against the Columbus Blue Jackets . Lapierre played 21 games with the Ducks , recording three assists in that span , before being dealt again prior to the NHL trade deadline on February 28 , 2011 . He was sent to the Vancouver Canucks , along with forward MacGregor Sharp , in exchange for minor @-@ league forward Joel Perrault and a third @-@ round draft pick in 2012 . 
 Canucks Head Coach Alain Vigneault had reportedly recommended Lapierre to General Manager Mike Gillis , having coached Lapierre in the QMJHL . Upon his arrival in Vancouver , Lapierre 's reputation as an agitator was addressed by Vigneault and he was asked to reduce activity in between whistles , such as trash talking and unnecessary hits . Lapierre scored his first goal as a Canuck on March 16 , 2011 , in a 4 – 2 win against the Colorado Avalanche . While the Canucks originally acquired Lapierre with the intention of playing him on the fourth line , he soon moved up to the third with the injury of Manny Malhotra late in the season . Between Montreal , Anaheim and Vancouver , he finished the season with six goals and six assists over 78 games . Centring the third line with wingers Raffi Torres and Jannik Hansen during the 2011 playoffs , Lapierre added three goals and five points over 25 games . He helped Vancouver reach the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time in 17 years . During the Finals , Lapierre scored the only goal of Game 5 against the Boston Bruins , helping Vancouver to a 1 – 0 win . With a 3 – 2 lead in the series , the Canucks went on to lose the next two contests , losing the Stanley Cup in seven games . Set to become an restricted free agent in the off @-@ season , Lapierre was re @-@ signed by Vancouver to a two @-@ year , $ 2 million contract on June 27 , 2011 . 
 = = = St. Louis Blues = = = 
 Lapierre agreed to a two @-@ year , $ 2 @.@ 2 million contract with the St. Louis Blues . On October 15 , 2013 against the San Jose Sharks , Lapierre checked Dan Boyle into the boards , hospitalizing him and causing a fight between the two teams ; Lapierre was ejected from the game . He was subsequently suspended , and a disciplinary hearing was held . Lapierre was suspended for five games by NHL Director of Player Safety Brendan Shanahan on October 18 , 2013 . 
 = = = Pittsburgh Penguins = = = 
 On January 27 , 2015 , Lapierre was traded from the Blues to the Pittsburgh Penguins in exchange for Marcel Goc . Lapierre played a key role during the 2015 playoffs , getting under the skin of the New York Rangers by drawing penalties , instigating fights , taunting and most notably doing play @-@ by @-@ play towards the Rangers ' bench . He played an important role on the face @-@ off dot and on the penalty kill , frustrating the New York Rangers and his former head coach in Vancouver , Alain Vigneault . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 On September 1 , 2015 , Lapierre sign a one @-@ year contract with Modo Hockey of the Swedish Hockey League . The contract comes with an option for a second year . On January 20 , 2016 Lapierre 's asked for his contract to be terminated with Modo Hockey . After beginning the season with coach Larry <unk> who was later relieved of his duties as Modo coach . Andreas Johansson the new coach brought in a system that was not favourable for Lapierre 's style of play . Maxim Lapierre who was leading Modo in scoring posting 8G , 11A , 19P in 34 games asked for his contract to be formally terminated . Lapierre was the third NHL player to leave Modo during the 2015 – 16 season , both Ryan Whitney and Kyle Wilson left prior to Lapierre 's departure as well . On January 25 , 2016 , he signed a contract with HC Lugano of the Swiss NLA for the remainder of the season . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Lapierre is known primarily as a checking forward , centring either the third or fourth line . He has a reputation as an agitator , distracting and provoking opposing players to take penalties . He plays with an aggressive edge and led all Canadiens forward in hits in his last full season with the club . Defensively responsible , he earns time on the penalty kill . In 2008 – 09 , he ranked third on the Canadiens in average short handed time on ice per game . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = Rodrigues parrot = 
 The Rodrigues parrot ( Necropsittacus rodricanus ) is an extinct parrot in the family <unk> . It was endemic to the Mascarene island of Rodrigues in the Indian Ocean east of Madagascar . It is unclear what other species it is most closely related to , but it has been classified as a member of the tribe Psittaculini , along with other Mascarene parrots . It had similarities with the broad @-@ billed parrot , and may have been closely related . 
 The Rodrigues parrot was green , and had a proportionally large head and beak along with a long tail . Its exact size is unknown , but it may have been around 50 cm ( 20 in ) long . It may have looked similar to the great @-@ billed parrot . It frequented and nested on islets off southern Rodrigues to avoid introduced rats , and fed on the seeds of the Fernelia buxifolia shrub . The species is known from subfossil bones and from mentions in three contemporary accounts . It was last mentioned in 1761 , and probably became extinct soon after , probably due to a combination of predation by rats , deforestation , and hunting by humans . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Parrots matching the Rodrigues parrot were first mentioned by François Leguat in 1708 and Julien Tafforet in 1726 , who were both marooned on Rodrigues . The parrot was scientifically described as Psittacus rodricanus by the French ornithologist Alphonse Milne @-@ Edwards in 1867 . He moved it to its own genus Necropsittacus in 1874 . The binomial , N. rodricanus , translates to " dead parrot of Rodrigues " , in reference to its extinction . The holotype specimen is a subfossil partial beak , but its current whereabouts are unknown . It may be specimen UMZC 575 , a rostrum that was sent from Milne @-@ Edwards ' to Alfred Newton after 1880 , which matches the drawing and description in Milne @-@ Edwards ' paper , but this cannot be confirmed . In addition , subfossil remains of at least four individuals have been found in the Plaine Corail . 
 After examining a skull of the Rodrigues parrot , Edward Newton and Hans Gadow found it to be closely related to the broad @-@ billed parrot due to their large jaws and other osteological features , but were unable to determine whether they both belonged in the same genus , since a crest was only known from the latter . Graham S. Cowles instead found their skulls too dissimilar for them to be close relatives . The skeleton of the Rodrigues parrot has similarities with the Tanygnathus and Psittacula parrot genera . 
 In his 1907 book Extinct Birds , Walther Rothschild placed two hypothetical parrot species in the Necropsittacus genus ; the Réunion red and green parakeet ( Necropsittacus ? borbonicus ) and the Mauritian parrot ( Necropsittacus ? <unk> ) . The former was based on a single account by Sieur Dubois , and it is uncertain what the source for the latter is , so both are considered dubious today . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Many endemic Mascarene birds , including the dodo , are derived from South Asian ancestors , and the English palaeontologist Julian Hume has proposed that this may be the case for all the parrots there as well . Sea levels were lower during the Pleistocene , so it was possible for species to colonise some of the then less isolated islands . Although most extinct parrot species of the Mascarenes are poorly known , subfossil remains show that they shared features such as enlarged heads and jaws , reduced pectoral bones , and robust leg bones . 
 Hume has suggested that they have a common origin in the radiation of the Psittaculini tribe , basing this theory on morphological features and the fact that Psittacula parrots have managed to colonise many isolated islands in the Indian Ocean . The Psittaculini may have invaded the area several times , as many of the species were so specialised that they may have evolved significantly on hotspot islands before the Mascarenes emerged from the sea . A 2011 genetic study instead found that the Mascarene parrot ( Mascarinus mascarinus ) of nearby Réunion was most closely related to the lesser vasa parrot ( Coracopsis nigra ) from Madagascar and nearby islands , and therefore unrelated to the Psittacula parrots , undermining the theory of their common origin . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Rodrigues parrot was described as large and with a big head and a long tail . Its plumage was described as being of uniform green colouration . Its skull was flat and depressed compared to those of most other parrots , but similar to the genus Ara . The skull was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) long without the beak , 38 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) wide , and 24 mm ( 0 @.@ 94 in ) deep . Its exact body length is unknown , but it may have been around 50 cm ( 20 in ) . Its size has been likened to that of a large cockatoo . Its tibia was 32 % smaller than that of a female broad @-@ billed parrot , yet the pectoral bones were of similar size , and proportionally its head was the largest of any Mascarene species of parrot . 
 The pectoral and pelvic bones were similar in size to those of the New Zealand kaka ( Nestor meridionalis ) , and it may have looked similar to the great @-@ billed parrot ( Tanygnathus <unk> ) in life , but with a larger head and tail . It differed from other Mascarene parrots in several skeletal features , including having nostrils that faced upwards instead of forwards . No features of the skull suggest it had a crest like the broad @-@ billed parrot , and there is not enough fossil evidence to determine whether it had pronounced sexual dimorphism . There are intermediate specimens between the longest and shortest examples of the known skeletal elements , which indicates there were no distinct size groups . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Tafforet 's 1726 description is the only detailed account of the Rodrigues parrot in life : 
 The largest are larger than a pigeon , and have a tail very long , the head large as well as the beak . They mostly come on the islets which are to the south of the island , where they eat a small black seed , which produces a small shrub whose leaves have the smell of the orange tree , and come to the mainland to drink water ... they have their plumage green . The “ Bois de <unk> ” [ Fernelia buxifolia ] is common there and very small . The perroquets eat the seeds . 
 The shrub mentioned by Tafforet , Fernelia buxifolia , is endangered today , but was common all over Rodrigues and nearby islets during his visit . At this time , the parrots , the Rodrigues starling and the Rodrigues pigeon frequented and nested on these islets to avoid the large population of introduced rats on Rodrigues . 
 Many other of the endemic species of Rodrigues became extinct after the arrival of man , so the ecosystem of the island is heavily damaged . Before humans arrived , forests covered the island entirely , but very little remains today due to deforestation . The Rodrigues parrot lived alongside other recently extinct birds such as the Rodrigues solitaire , the Rodrigues rail , Newton 's parakeet , the Rodrigues starling , the Rodrigues owl , the Rodrigues night heron , and the Rodrigues pigeon . Extinct reptiles include the domed Rodrigues giant tortoise , the saddle @-@ backed Rodrigues giant tortoise , and the Rodrigues day gecko . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 Of the eight or so parrot species endemic to the Mascarenes , only the echo parakeet ( Psittacula echo ) of Mauritius has survived . The others were likely all made extinct by a combination of excessive hunting and deforestation . The offshore islets of Rodrigues were eventually infested by rats as well , and this is believed to be the reason for the demise of the Rodrigues parrot and other birds there . The rats probably preyed on their eggs and chicks . The French astronomer Alexandre Guy Pingré visited <unk> to observe the 1761 transit of Venus . He indicated that local species were popular game , and found that the Rodrigues parrot was rare : 
 The perruche [ Newton 's parakeet ] seemed to me much more delicate [ than the flying @-@ fox ] . I would not have missed any game from France if this one had been commoner in Rodrigues ; but it begins to become rare . There are even fewer perroquets [ Rodrigues parrots ] , although there were once a big enough quantity according to François Leguat ; indeed a little islet south of Rodrigues still retains the name Isle of Parrots [ Isle Pierrot ] . 
 Pingré also reported that the island was becoming deforested by tortoise hunters who set fires to clear vegetation . Along with direct hunting of the parrots , this likely led to a reduction in the population of Rodrigues parrots . Pingré 's account is the last known mention of the species , and it probably became extinct soon after . 
 = Manchester Small @-@ Scale Experimental Machine = 
 The Manchester Small @-@ Scale Experimental Machine ( SSEM ) , nicknamed Baby , was the world 's first stored @-@ program computer . It was built at the Victoria University of Manchester , England , by Frederic C. Williams , Tom Kilburn and Geoff Tootill , and ran its first program on 21 June 1948 . 
 The machine was not intended to be a practical computer but was instead designed as a testbed for the Williams tube , an early form of computer memory . Although considered " small and primitive " by the standards of its time , it was the first working machine to contain all the elements essential to a modern electronic computer . As soon as the SSEM had demonstrated the feasibility of its design , a project was initiated at the university to develop it into a more usable computer , the Manchester Mark 1 . The Mark 1 in turn quickly became the prototype for the Ferranti Mark 1 , the world 's first commercially available general @-@ purpose computer . 
 The SSEM had a 32 @-@ bit word length and a memory of 32 words . As it was designed to be the simplest possible stored @-@ program computer , the only arithmetic operations implemented in hardware were subtraction and negation ; other arithmetic operations were implemented in software . The first of three programs written for the machine found the highest proper divisor of 218 ( 262 @,@ 144 ) , a calculation that was known would take a long time to run — and so prove the computer 's reliability — by testing every integer from 218 − 1 downwards , as division was implemented by repeated subtraction of the divisor . The program consisted of 17 instructions and ran for 52 minutes before reaching the correct answer of 131 @,@ 072 , after the SSEM had performed 3 @.@ 5 million operations ( for an effective CPU speed of 1 @.@ 1 <unk> ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first design for a program @-@ controlled computer was Charles Babbage 's Analytical Engine in the 1830s . A century later , in 1936 , mathematician Alan Turing published his description of what became known as a Turing machine , a theoretical concept intended to explore the limits of mechanical computation . Turing was not imagining a physical machine , but a person he called a " computer " , who acted according to the instructions provided by a tape on which symbols could be read and written sequentially as the tape moved under a tape head . Turing proved that if an algorithm can be written to solve a mathematical problem , then a Turing machine can execute that algorithm . 
 Konrad Zuse 's Z3 was the world 's first working programmable , fully automatic computer , with binary digital arithmetic logic , but it lacked the conditional branching of a Turing machine . On 12 May 1941 , it was successfully presented to an audience of scientists of the Deutsche <unk> für <unk> ( " German Laboratory for Aviation " ) in Berlin . The Z3 stored its program on an external tape , but it was electromechanical rather than electronic . The Colossus of 1943 was the first electronic computing device , but it was not a general @-@ purpose machine . 
 The ENIAC ( 1946 ) was the first machine that was both electronic and general purpose . It was Turing complete , with conditional branching , and programmable to solve a wide range of problems , but its program was held in the state of switches in <unk> , not in memory , and it could take several days to reprogram . Researchers such as Turing and Zuse investigated the idea of using the computer 's memory to hold the program as well as the data it was working on , but it was mathematician John von Neumann who became widely credited with defining that computer architecture , still used in almost all computers . 
 The construction of a von Neumann computer depended on the availability of a suitable memory device on which to store the program . During the Second World War researchers working on the problem of removing the clutter from radar signals had developed a form of delay line memory , the first practical application of which was the mercury delay line , developed by J. Presper Eckert . Radar transmitters send out regular brief pulses of radio energy , the reflections from which are displayed on a CRT screen . As operators are usually interested only in moving targets , it was desirable to filter out any distracting reflections from stationary objects . The filtering was achieved by comparing each received pulse with the previous pulse , and rejecting both if they were identical , leaving a signal containing only the images of any moving objects . To store each received pulse for later comparison it was passed through a transmission line , delaying it by exactly the time between transmitted pulses . 
 Turing joined the National Physical Laboratory ( NPL ) in October 1945 , by which time scientists within the Ministry of Supply had concluded that Britain needed a National Mathematical Laboratory to coordinate machine @-@ aided computation . A Mathematics Division was set up at the NPL , and on 19 February 1946 Alan Turing presented a paper outlining his design for an electronic stored @-@ program computer to be known as the Automatic Computing Engine ( ACE ) . This was one of several projects set up in the years following the Second World War with the aim of constructing a stored @-@ program computer . At about the same time , EDVAC was under development at the University of Pennsylvania 's Moore School of Electrical Engineering , and the University of Cambridge Mathematical Laboratory was working on EDSAC . 
 The NPL did not have the expertise to build a machine like ACE , so they contacted Tommy Flowers at the General Post Office 's ( GPO ) Dollis Hill Research Laboratory . Flowers , the designer of Colossus , the world 's first programmable electronic computer , was committed elsewhere and was unable to take part in the project , although his team did build some mercury delay lines for ACE . The Telecommunications Research Establishment ( TRE ) was also approached for assistance , as was Maurice Wilkes at the University of Cambridge Mathematical Laboratory . 
 The government department responsible for the NPL decided that , of all the work being carried out by the TRE on its behalf , ACE was to be given the top priority . NPL 's decision led to a visit by the superintendent of the TRE 's Physics Division on 22 November 1946 , accompanied by Frederic C. Williams and A. M. Uttley , also from the TRE . Williams led a TRE development group working on CRT stores for radar applications , as an alternative to delay lines . He had already accepted a professorship at the University of Manchester , and most of his circuit technicians were in the process of being transferred to the Department of Atomic Energy . The TRE agreed to second a small number of technicians to work under Williams ' direction at the university , and to support another small group working with Uttley at the TRE . 
 = = Williams – Kilburn tube = = 
 Although early computers such as EDSAC made successful use of mercury delay line memory , the technology had several drawbacks ; it was heavy , it was expensive , and it did not allow data to be accessed randomly . In addition , because data was stored as a sequence of acoustic waves propagated through a mercury column , the device 's temperature had to be very carefully controlled , as the velocity of sound through a medium varies with its temperature . Williams had seen an experiment at Bell Labs demonstrating the effectiveness of cathode ray tubes ( CRT ) as an alternative to the delay line for removing ground echoes from radar signals . While working at the TRE , shortly before he joined the University of Manchester in December 1946 , he and Tom Kilburn had developed a form of electronic memory known as the Williams or Williams – Kilburn tube based on a standard CRT , the first random @-@ access digital storage device . The Manchester Small @-@ Scale Experimental Machine ( SSEM ) was designed to show that the system was a practical storage device , by testing that data held within it could be read and written at the speed necessary for use in a computer . 
 For use in a binary digital computer , the tube had to be capable of storing either one of two states at each of its memory locations , corresponding to the binary digits ( bits ) 0 and 1 . It exploited the positive or negative electrostatic charge generated by displaying either a dash or a dot at any position on the CRT screen , a phenomenon known as secondary emission . A dash generated a positive charge , and a dot a negative charge , either of which could be picked up by a detector plate in front of the screen ; a negative charge represented 0 , and a positive charge 1 . The charge dissipated in about 0 @.@ 2 seconds , but it could be automatically refreshed from the data picked up by the detector . 
 The Williams tube was initially based on the <unk> , a commercially available 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) diameter CRT , but a smaller 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) tube , the <unk> , was used in the SSEM . 
 = = Development and design = = 
 Following his appointment to the Chair of Electrical Engineering at Manchester University , Williams recruited his TRE colleague Tom Kilburn on secondment . By the autumn of 1947 the pair had increased the storage capacity of the Williams tube from one bit to 2 @,@ 048 , arranged in a 64 by 32 @-@ bit array , and demonstrated that it was able to store those bits for four hours . Engineer Geoff Tootill joined the team on loan from TRE in September 1947 , and remained on secondment until April 1949 . 
 Max Newman had been appointed to the Chair of Pure Mathematics at Manchester University in 1945 . During the Second World War he had worked as a cryptanalyst at Bletchley Park , and had led the team which in 1943 produced the first of the Colossus code @-@ breaking computers . Although Newman played no active role in the development of the SSEM , or any of the subsequent Manchester computers , he was generally supportive and enthusiastic about the project , and arranged for the acquisition of war @-@ surplus supplies for its construction , including GPO metal racks from Bletchley . 
 By June 1948 the SSEM had been built and was working . It was 17 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) in length , 7 feet 4 inches ( 2 @.@ 24 m ) tall , and weighed almost 1 long ton ( 1 @.@ 0 t ) . The machine contained 550 valves — 300 diodes and 250 <unk> — and had a power consumption of 3500 watts . The arithmetic unit was built using EF50 <unk> valves , which had been widely used during wartime . The SSEM used one Williams tube to provide 32 by 32 @-@ bit words of random @-@ access memory ( RAM ) , a second to hold a 32 @-@ bit accumulator in which the intermediate results of a calculation could be stored temporarily , and a third to hold the current program instruction along with its address in memory . A fourth CRT , without the storage electronics of the other three , was used as the output device , able to display the bit pattern of any selected storage tube . 
 Each 32 @-@ bit word of RAM could contain either a program instruction or data . In a program instruction , bits 0 – 12 represented the memory address of the operand to be used , and bits 13 – 15 specified the operation to be executed , such as storing a number in memory ; the remaining 16 bits were unused . The SSEM 's single operand architecture meant that the second operand of any operation was implicit : the accumulator or the program counter ( instruction address ) ; program instructions specified only the address of the data in memory . 
 A word in the computer 's memory could be read , written , or refreshed , in 360 microseconds . An instruction took four times as long to execute as accessing a word from memory , giving an instruction execution rate of about 700 per second . The main store was refreshed continuously , a process which took 20 milliseconds to complete , as each of the SSEM 's 32 words had to be read and then refreshed in sequence . 
 The SSEM represented negative numbers using two 's complement , as most computers still do . In that representation , the value of the most significant bit denotes the sign of a number ; positive numbers have a zero in that position and negative numbers a one . Thus the range of numbers that could be held in each 32 @-@ bit word was − 231 to + 231 − 1 ( decimal : − 2 @,@ 147 @,@ 483 @,@ 648 to + 2 @,@ 147 @,@ 483 @,@ 647 ) . 
 = = Programming = = 
 The SSEM 's three bit instruction set allowed a maximum of eight ( 23 ) different instructions . In contrast to the modern convention , the machine 's storage was arranged with the least significant digits to the left ; thus a one was represented in three bits as " 100 " , rather than the more conventional " 001 " . 
 The awkward negative operations were a consequence of the SSEM 's lack of hardware to perform any arithmetic operations except subtraction and negation . It was considered unnecessary to build an adder before testing could begin as addition can easily be implemented by subtraction , i.e. x + y can be computed as − ( − x − y ) . Therefore , adding two numbers together , X and Y , required four instructions : 
 LDN X / / load negative X into the accumulator 
 <unk> Y / / subtract Y from the value in the accumulator 
 STO S / / store the result at S 
 LDN S / / load negative value at S into the accumulator 
 Programs were entered in binary form by stepping through each word of memory in turn , and using a set of 32 switches known as the input device to set the value of each bit of each word to either 0 or 1 . The SSEM had no paper @-@ tape reader or punch . 
 = = = First programs = = = 
 Three programs were written for the computer . The first , consisting of 17 instructions , was written by Kilburn , and so far as can be ascertained first ran on 21 June 1948 . It was designed to find the highest proper factor of 218 ( 262 @,@ 144 ) by trying every integer from 218 − 1 downwards . The divisions were implemented by repeated subtractions of the divisor . The SSEM took 3 @.@ 5 million operations and 52 minutes to produce the answer ( 131 @,@ 072 ) . The program used eight words of working storage in addition to its 17 words of instructions , giving a program size of 25 words . 
 Geoff Tootill wrote an amended version of the program the following month , and in mid @-@ July Alan Turing — who had been appointed as a reader in the mathematics department at Manchester University in September 1948 — submitted the third program , to carry out long division . Turing had by then been appointed to the nominal post of Deputy Director of the Computing Machine Laboratory at the university , although the laboratory did not become a physical reality until 1951 . 
 = = Later developments = = 
 Williams and Kilburn reported on the SSEM in a letter to the Journal Nature , published in September 1948 . The machine 's successful demonstration quickly led to the construction of a more practical computer , the Manchester Mark 1 , work on which began in August 1948 . The first version was operational by April 1949 , and it in turn led directly to the development of the Ferranti Mark 1 , the world 's first commercially available general @-@ purpose computer . 
 In 1998 , a working replica of the SSEM , now on display at the Museum of Science and Industry in Manchester , was built to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the running of its first program . Demonstrations of the machine in operation are held regularly at the museum . In 2008 , an original panoramic photograph of the entire machine was discovered at the University of Manchester . The photograph , taken on 15 December 1948 by a research student , Alec Robinson , had been reproduced in The Illustrated London News in June 1949 . 
 = Homer 's Night Out = 
 " Homer 's Night Out " is the tenth episode of The Simpsons ' first season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 25 , 1990 . It was written by Jon Vitti and directed by Rich Moore . In the episode , Bart orders a mail @-@ order spy camera , which he uses to secretly take a photograph of Homer dancing with an exotic belly dancer . Marge makes Homer apologize to the exotic dancer to teach Bart that women are not objects . Sam McMurray guest stars in the episode as Gulliver Dark , the man that introduces Homer to the crowd at the burlesque show . 
 The episode was well received by critics and it was the second highest rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . This episode , along with three other episodes of the show , is featured on the The Simpsons Gone Wild DVD released in 2004 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bart purchases a miniature spy camera from a mail @-@ order catalog and uses it to take candid photos around the house . Later , Homer tells Marge he is going to a bachelor party for a co @-@ worker , Eugene Fisk . While Homer is gone , Marge decides to take the children to the Rusty Barnacle , a seafood restaurant where ( unknown to her ) the bachelor party is well under way . 
 A sexy belly dancer named Princess Kashmir arrives at the party and invites Homer on stage to dance with her . On the way to the restaurant bathroom , Bart wanders into the bachelor party room and eagerly snaps a picture of Homer and Kashmir . Bart brings the picture to school and gives a copy of it to Milhouse , who promptly gets requests from other students for a copy of the picture . It is not long before everyone in Springfield has one . Marge sees a copy of the picture at her aerobics class and furiously rips it from the bulletin board . When Homer gets home that day , Marge immediately shoves the picture in his face and demands an explanation . At that point , Bart inadvertently reveals that it was his picture , and Homer gets angry at him for taking the picture . After sending Bart to his room , Marge shoves a hastily half @-@ packed suitcase in front of Homer and kicks him out of the house . Homer spends the night at Barney 's apartment . 
 The next day Homer goes home to apologize to Marge . To his surprise , he learns that what upset her was not what he did , but that Bart saw it and will one day misconstrue it as a sign that it is okay to treat women like sex objects . She insists that he take Bart to meet Princess Kashmir so that Bart can see for himself that she is more than just a stripper . Left with no alternative , Homer and Bart scour the strip clubs of Springfield to find Princess Kashmir . Eventually , they track her down at the Sapphire Lounge . 
 Homer introduces himself and Bart to Kashmir , who is preoccupied with getting on stage for her performance , though she understands what Homer is trying to get through for his son . Without knowing it , Homer accidentally finds himself on stage at the burlesque show . Homer is about to be thrown offstage when the audience recognize him as the guy from the picture . The audience applauds and Homer gets caught up in the fanfare and starts dancing with the showgirls , until he sees Bart and realizes what he was supposed to do . Homer stops the show and successfully manages to make a plea to the audience to treat women with respect . Marge , who is in the audience , accepts Homer 's apology and the two make up . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Jon Vitti and directed by Rich Moore . Barney 's apartment , which Homer spends the night in when he is kicked out by Marge , is partly based on an apartment Jim Reardon , Moore , and a few other animators of The Simpsons shared in college . One of the strip clubs Homer and Bart visit when they are trying to find Princess Kashmir is based on the Seventh Veil Strip Club in Los Angeles , California . The staff went around Hollywood taking pictures of strip clubs so that they could get inspiration for the interior design of the strip club buildings in Springfield . The character designer designed over fifty different international showgirl costumes for the showgirls in the burlesque show sequence . Carl Carlson made his first appearance on The Simpsons in this episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Homer 's Night Out " finished fourteenth place in the weekly ratings for the week of March 19 – 25 , 1990 , with a Nielsen rating of 16 @.@ 9 . It was the second highest rated show on the Fox network that week . " Homer 's Night Out " received generally positive reviews from critics . In a DVD review of the first season , David B. Grelck gave the episode a rating of 4 / 5 and named it one of his two favorite episodes of the season . He added that it " allows us to see that Homer really does love Marge a lot without having to blatantly stamp sentimentality all over it . The episode is strange , goofy and fun . " Colin Jacobson at DVD Movie Guide said that " the concept of Marge ’ s anger at Homer got old , but this episode managed to offer a reasonably entertaining affair . It was fun to see Homer treated like a party god , and this offered a few nice moments . The overall level of quality remained good throughout the show , but it didn ’ t rise to any great heights . " David Packard at DVD Verdict said in a review of the The Simpsons Gone Wild DVD that " this episode sports some of the awkward animation and voice work that is prevalent in episodes from the first season . That aspect isn 't an issue to me ; in fact , I quite enjoy season one as it shows the early efforts of the series getting its legs in making the transition from its origin on The Tracey Ullman Show . The problem I have with this episode is that it 's not particularly funny . I chuckled a few times , but the episode doesn 't have the rollicking gags and sly humor of the two episodes to follow . " 
 = February 2009 tornado outbreak = 
 The February 2009 tornado outbreak occurred on February 10 and February 11 , 2009 , affecting portions of both the Central and Eastern United States . During the two @-@ day period , 15 tornadoes touched down in seven states . Oklahoma was struck by six tornadoes , the most of any state . The first day of the outbreak produced the most tornadoes ; the second brought mainly high wind damage and rain or snow in most of the Northeast . 
 The storm system responsible for the tornado outbreak resulted from the unusual congruence of a cold , dry system , originating in the Four Corners and a warm , moist system , moving north out of Texas . Complicating factors included daytime heating and a strong wind field favorable to the creation of circulating thunderstorms . On the second day , the stronger cold front limited discrete supercell activity and the risk of tornadoes decreased significantly . A squall line , however , produced high winds and rain along the river valleys , primarily those of the Mississippi and Ohio Rivers . This squall line continued to renew its energy as it passed through the Midwest , Pennsylvania , New Jersey , New York , and New England , causing wind and water damage , and dumping 6 inches ( 15 cm ) of snow in central and eastern Massachusetts . The resulting power outages affected homes throughout the northeastern seaboard . 
 The most destructive of the weather events , an EF4 tornado , traveled for nearly an hour through four counties in Oklahoma during the evening of February 10 . It destroyed 114 residences in Lone Grove alone . All casualties ( 8 deaths and 46 injuries ) from the outbreak were due to the tornado in the Lone Grove area in Carter County . It was the deadliest tornado to hit Oklahoma since May 3 , 1999 and the strongest tornado during the month of February in Oklahoma since 1950 . 
 = = Meteorological synopsis = = 
 = = = February 10 = = = 
 During the afternoon hours of February 10 , 2009 , a strong , middle and upper storm system moved across the Four Corners region into the central and southern Great Plains . A moist , low @-@ level air mass streamed northward across Texas and Louisiana into eastern Oklahoma and the Ozarks ahead of the system . Daytime heating of the <unk> boundary layer increased throughout the afternoon across Oklahoma and Texas as cloud cover shifted eastward . Cooling aloft , in conjunction with the approaching storm system , led to atmospheric instability , resulting in thunderstorms . A very strong wind field increased with height through the lower troposphere , resulting in a wind shear favorable for rotation in the thunderstorms . 
 Meteorologists expected large hail stones and damaging winds , and recognized the potential for strong tornadoes as thunderstorms developed from central Oklahoma southward into north @-@ central Texas in the afternoon . During the night , a cold front moved eastward toward the Mississippi Valley and organized the thunderstorms into a lengthy squall line . Along with a continued threat of hail and tornadoes , the risk of damaging winds increased . The Storm Prediction Center announced a " moderate risk " of severe weather for portions of eastern Oklahoma , northeastern Texas , western Arkansas , and northwestern Louisiana . 
 At around 1 : 00 pm CST ( 19 : 00 UTC ) , a line of violent thunderstorms began developing near the Wichita Mountains in Comanche County , Oklahoma . The supercell that eventually produced the first tornado of the outbreak moved northeast through Caddo and Grady counties over the next 30 to 45 minutes , before reaching southeastern Canadian County at around 2 : 00 pm CST ( 20 : 00 UTC ) . By 2 : 14 pm CST ( 20 : 14 UTC ) , the line had formed a hook echo , which was fully developed four minutes later . Observers reported wall clouds from the Yukon area into western portions of Oklahoma City during the next 10 to 15 minutes . At 2 : 36 pm CST ( 20 : 37 UTC ) , the supercell produced a tornado near the Wiley Post Airport in Oklahoma City , causing damage at the Northwest Expressway . According to the Doppler weather radar , the hook continued to show signs of rotation as it moved northeast across Oklahoma County . At 2 : 52 pm CST ( 20 : 52 UTC ) , the supercell produced its second tornado on the northwestern side of Edmond which caused its most severe damage near the Oklahoma and Logan County line . The tornado dissipated north of the Logan County Line at 3 : 05 pm CST ( 21 : 05 UTC ) . 
 The supercell produced three more tornadoes in Oklahoma as it continued to move northeast . The third tornado occurred northwest of Meridian in Logan County at 3 : 26 pm CST ( 21 : 36 UTC ) . A fourth developed near Langston in Logan County and moved to about 4 mi ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) southwest of Stillwater in Payne County . The fifth tornado occurred in Pawnee County . In addition to the five Oklahoma tornadoes , three tornadoes struck northern sections of Texas and one tornado hit Springfield , Missouri . 
 The most significant tornado , later named the Lone Grove Tornado , first touched down in southeast Jefferson County , Oklahoma at 6 : 48 pm CST ( 00 : 48 UTC ) near the Red River . The tornado crossed through rural areas as it moved to the northeast into Love County , before going into Carter County at 7 : 10 pm CST ( 01 : 10 UTC ) . The tornado continued moving to the northeast for the next 15 minutes before striking Lone Grove , Oklahoma . The tornado then crossed Interstate 35 just north of the Prairie Valley Road exit ramp and tracked through rural areas of northeastern Carter County to the east of Springer , ending at 7 : 43 pm CST ( 01 : 43 UTC ) . 
 = = = February 11 = = = 
 The Storm Prediction Center issued a slight risk warning for February 11 . The warning included parts of the Deep South , Ohio Valley , Midwest , and Appalachians . The risk of tornadoes was lower on February 11 due to a stronger front , which limited discrete supercell activity and decreased atmospheric instability . The " slight risk " was later upgraded to a " moderate risk " as a powerful squall line developed . 
 = = Notable tornadoes = = 
 = = = Edmond , Oklahoma = = = 
 The second tornado to touch down during the outbreak formed at around 2 : 52 pm CST ( 20 : 52 UTC ) about 3 mi ( 5 km ) north @-@ northwest of Edmond , Oklahoma . The tornado traveled towards the northeast , crossing into Logan County and dissipating at 3 : 05 pm CST ( 21 : 05 UTC ) . Following a survey by the National Weather Service , the tornado was estimated to have been about 75 yd ( 70 m ) wide and was rated as an EF2 . Most of the downtown residences were left without power after the tornado struck the area around 2 : 59 pm CST ( 20 : 59 UTC ) . Ten minutes earlier , tornado sirens were sounded as a tornado warning was issued for the area . Students who were being taken home by bus at the time were immediately taken to the nearest school for shelter . The schools were placed in lockdown for about two hours following the tornado sirens . In Edmond , six homes were destroyed , eight structures received major damage , 51 received minor damage and another 166 structures were affected . Some of the homes damaged by the tornado were estimated to be worth over $ 1 million . The Oak Tree Golf Club sustained severe damage , with numerous trees being uprooted . Hundreds of trees were uprooted or significantly damaged along the tornado 's path . In Oklahoma County , the tornado left an estimated 28 @,@ 500 people without power . Monetary damage numbers were not available . 
 = = = Lone Grove , Oklahoma = = = 
 At 6 : 48 pm CST ( 00 : 48 UTC ) , a large wedge tornado – a tornado that is wider than the distance from ground to cloud base – touched down near the Red River , along the Texas @-@ Oklahoma border . It crossed through Jefferson and Love counties before entering Carter County where it proceeded to slam into Lone Grove . The tornado dissipated at 7 : 43 pm CST ( 01 : 43 UTC ) after remaining on the ground for nearly an hour and traveling an estimated 35 mi ( 56 km ) . After an assessment by the National Weather Service office in Norman , Oklahoma , the tornado was rated as an EF4 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale with winds reaching an estimated 170 mph ( 270 km / h ) . 
 The Lone Grove Tornado was the deadliest to hit Oklahoma since May 3 , 1999 , and the strongest tornado during the month of February in Oklahoma since 1950 . The previous strongest were two F3 tornadoes which touched down on February 17 , 1961 . 
 The tornado destroyed businesses and residences across a swath over 0 @.@ 5 mi ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) wide and 35 mi ( 56 km ) long . In Lone Grove alone , buildings were thrown off their slabs and the local chamber of commerce office was flattened . The tornado destroyed a furniture store , and shattered the glass lobby of the local UPS building . The destruction of a mobile home park containing 40 homes left close to 100 people homeless . One mobile home was thrown 100 yd ( 91 m ) from its foundation . A total of 114 residences were destroyed in Lone Grove . 
 To the east of Lone Grove , the area north of Ardmore was also hard hit . Several buildings , including those of the Beaver Academy and the Ardmore Adventist Academy , were destroyed . Although damage centered on the Ardmore Academy gymnasium , most of the campus was considered a total loss . In Ardmore , eight homes were destroyed and another 20 sustained damage . 
 Eight people were confirmed dead as a result of the tornado . Seven of these fatalities were in the town of Lone Grove ; most were determined to have been caused by “ blunt @-@ force trauma to the head " . Three of the victims were found inside their homes and two were found outside . A victim found in an open field was reportedly picked up and thrown by the tornado , and died on impact with the ground . One victim was crushed when a pickup truck fell on him ; similarly , a truck driver died after being pinned under his vehicle on Interstate 35 . Two other victims , the parents of a 13 @-@ year @-@ old girl , were killed when the tornado picked the three of them out of their home and threw them 400 ft ( 120 m ) . Three people were rescued after being trapped in the ruins of their home for almost a day . Officials stated that 10 to 15 people remained unaccounted for on the night of February 12 but they were presumed to have left the area . An additional 46 people were injured . Total monetary damages from the tornado were estimated at $ 3 million . 
 = = Non @-@ tornadic events = = 
 During the evening of February 10 , a long line of severe thunderstorms developed along the tail @-@ end of a cold front in central Texas . Meteorologists predicted embedded supercell thunderstorms that could produce hail up to 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 6 @.@ 4 cm ) in diameter and wind gusts up to 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) . North of the squall line , bow echo thunderstorms developed in Missouri , causing widespread wind damage . By the morning of February 11 , the squall line reached as far southeast as eastern Louisiana , where winds were recorded in excess of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) along with hail up to 1 inch ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) in diameter . Around 12 pm EST ( 17 : 00 UTC ) , the first line of thunderstorms significantly weakened , but a new , narrow line developed in eastern Kentucky and Tennessee . A strong , deep layer wind field prevented a number of tornadoes from forming but instead caused widespread wind damage . Throughout the day , the line of low @-@ topped thunderstorms continued eastward , reaching Ohio and West Virginia by 4 pm EST ( 21 : 00 UTC ) . Several hours later , the line broke apart , with the strongest storms tracking through Pennsylvania . By February 12 , rain showers , accompanied by high winds up to 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) , affected most of the Northeastern United States . 
 = = = Oklahoma = = = 
 In addition to the strong tornadoes , Oklahoma was affected by high winds and large hail . The hail , measuring up to 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 11 cm ) in diameter , caused significant damage in <unk> . Numerous cars were hit and several houses sustained roof damage ; the cost of the hail damage was estimated at $ 100 @,@ 000 in the town . Heavy rains produced by the storms also caused isolated flooding , inundating numerous streets with several feet of water . Lightning also produced damage in the state , with one bolt striking an oil tank , igniting a fire . The fire severely damaged the tank , leaving $ 13 @,@ 000 in damages . Throughout the state , an estimated 61 @,@ 000 people lost power : 29 @,@ 000 lost power due to thunderstorms and 32 @,@ 000 due to tornadoes . In Mississippi , strong winds on the backside of the cold front blew a metal roof off a power company building , bringing down several trees and power lines . Damages in the state amounted to $ 35 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Texas = = = 
 Strong straight @-@ line winds near 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) caused significant damage in Hamilton County , Texas . A barn sustained severe damage and a home lost most of its roof . 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) wind destroyed a small outbuilding and carried debris about 1 @.@ 5 mi ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) north . A trailer near Hamilton Municipal Airport was broken off its moorings and moved 20 ft ( 6 m ) . Several mobile homes near Hamilton sustained damage after tree limbs fell on them . In Huron , several outbuildings were damaged or destroyed and a permanent building was damaged at a youth retreat center . An estimated 15 @,@ 000 residences were without power following the storms in Texas . One home in McGregor was destroyed by the winds . The three people who lived in the home , one of whom was a child , all sustained injuries . The father had a few broken ribs and several scratches , injuries sustained during a search for his son . In Louisiana , 12 @,@ 000 residences lost power due to the storm system . Two wildfires were sparked in Kenedy County and <unk> County , burning 300 and 20 acres ( 121 @.@ 4 and 8 @.@ 1 ha ) respectively . The larger of the two fires was along Texas State Highway 77 . The second fire burned three homes and threatened 20 others . 
 = = = Arkansas = = = 
 In Arkansas , high winds produced by the squall line knocked out power to 315 @,@ 324 residences and caused widespread structural damage . Trees and power lines were brought down in eight counties , and several homes in Independence and Van Buren County sustained damage . The damage in these counties was caused by winds gusting up to 57 mph ( 92 km / h ) and leaving $ 200 @,@ 000 in damages . An 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) wind gust in Van Buren blew a barn onto Arkansas Highway 9 . Hundreds of trees were blown down , many of which fell on homes , causing widespread damage which amounted to approximately $ 625 @,@ 000 . In Conway County , a sawmill and two barns were destroyed , while several homes and a church also sustained damage , mainly roof damage . Damages in the county were estimated at $ 300 @,@ 000 . Numerous homes sustained wind damage and two mobile homes and a recreational vehicle were overturned . Damages in the county were estimated at $ 750 @,@ 000 . Total damages throughout the state were estimated at $ 2 @.@ 4 million . Seven people sustained injuries in the state . 
 = = = Ohio = = = 
 In Ohio , 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) wind gusts led to a highway accident that killed a truck driver . The high winds also caused significant damage throughout the state . Heavy rains produced by the same system inundated several streets in flood @-@ prone towns in Ohio . In Scioto County , the high winds destroyed a brick house and brought down power lines . The most significant damage resulted from the strong pressure gradient behind the frontal system . Thousands of tree were knocked down or uprooted by winds gusting in excess of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) , cutting power to 585 @,@ 775 residences . Ten railroad cars were knocked off their tracks near Shelby . Several hundred homes lost shingles and gutters due to the winds . Wind also overturned two semi @-@ trailers , though the drivers of both vehicles were unharmed . A vacant school building in Epworth lost its entire roof . Some windows were damaged or broken by flying debris or fallen trees . Power outages forced numerous schools to close for at least two days following the storm . A large barn was leveled just north of Brighton in Lorain County by 64 mph ( 103 km / h ) winds . Throughout the state , damages from the storm system amounted to $ 4 @.@ 7 million . 
 = = = Missouri , Kentucky , Tennessee and Michigan = = = 
 In Missouri , high winds caused widespread damage and knocked out power to 7 @,@ 629 residences . Several homes and businesses lost their windows due to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) wind gusts produced within squall lines . In Huntsville , Alabama , a car carrying four people lost control on rain @-@ slicked roads and crashed into a van , killing one of the occupants and injuring the other three . Another fatality occurred in Kentucky when a utility worker was knocked over by high winds and fell 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) to his death while trying to restore power . Following the widespread power outages from a severe ice storm , an additional 161 @,@ 588 residences lost power due to 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) winds . Flooding and high winds in Michigan knocked out power to about 57 @,@ 000 residences . In southern Michigan , upwards of 0 @.@ 8 inches ( 2 @.@ 0 cm ) of rain fell , leading to faster snowmelt . In Tennessee , several structures were damaged and numerous trees were knocked down , closing roads throughout the state as the squall line tracked eastward . A total of 74 @,@ 052 residences lost power due to the winds . Winds gusting up to 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) caused substantial damage in Rutherford County . Several commercial buildings had major roof damage , leaving $ 150 @,@ 000 in damages . Throughout Tennessee , damages from the storm system were estimated at $ 1 @.@ 1 million . 
 = = = Iowa , Indiana and Virginia = = = 
 In Iowa , heavy rains triggered rapid snowmelt , causing isolated flooding . Only minor impacts resulted from the flooding and total damages from the event was estimated at $ 25 @,@ 000 . A total of 14 @,@ 590 residences lost power in Indiana . Several large trees were brought down by high winds , one of which fell on a home in South Bend , leaving $ 50 @,@ 000 in damages . In the town of Carmel , a total of 2 @.@ 75 inches ( 70 mm ) of rain fell , the highest in the state . The heavy rains , in combination with unseasonably warm temperatures , led to significant snowmelt and flooding . The highest wind gust recorded in the state was 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) in Crawford County . A total of 70 @,@ 695 residences lost power in Illinois . Rainfall up to 4 inches ( 100 mm ) fell throughout most of the state . Several major roadways were covered in flood waters . The Little Wabash River overflowed its banks and inundated nearby roads . Along Illinois Route 1 , a large tree blocked a section of the road near Georgetown . The fallen tree resulted in a vehicle accident but the driver was unharmed . One person was killed by high winds in Davy , West Virginia when a gymnasium roof collapsed . Throughout the state , power was knocked out to an estimated 225 @,@ 000 residences . In Montgomery County , Virginia , winds knocked down power lines which sparked two brush fires , one of which burned a total of 12 acres ( 4 @.@ 9 ha ) . Winds up to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) cut power to 28 @,@ 059 residences in the state . The strong winds also cut power to 50 @,@ 820 residences in Maryland . 
 = = = Western Pennsylvania and Chesapeake watershed = = = 
 Hurricane @-@ force wind gusts up to 92 mph ( 148 km / h ) caused significant damage and power losses in Pennsylvania . Throughout the state , at least 400 @,@ 000 residences lost power due to the winds . Allegheny Power stated that the loss of power due to this system was the largest ever experienced by the company . Thousands of trees and power lines were brought down by strong winds and numerous homes sustained significant damage . Although most of the damage to homes consisted of shingle damage , several homes lost gutters and had portions of their siding blown off . 
 In Pottstown , a large portion of the roof of a four @-@ story building was blown off , forcing residents to evacuate the building . An 18 ft ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) pillar was knocked down at the First Moravian Church in Easton . In Northampton County , a fire sparked by fallen power lines destroyed a barn and partially melted a nearby metal shed . The blaze was fully contained by 40 firefighters . Another fire sparked by fallen power lines destroyed a garage in Lower Merion Township . In Philadelphia , the roof of a portable classroom began to peel off , forcing the forty students inside to evacuate to a safer structure . A large tree fell through one house and severely damaged the roof of a nearby home . Numerous major highways and local streets were shut down for several hours to allow cleanup crews to clear debris . Throughout the state , damages from the storm system amounted to $ 3 @.@ 7 million . 
 = = = New York = = = 
 In upstate New York , winds in excess of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) shattered windows , toppled numerous trees , and brought down power lines , cutting power to more than 50 @,@ 000 residences . Unseasonably warm temperatures and heavy rains from the storm system increased the snowmelt rate in northern areas of the state . In Genesee County , an estimated 2 to 5 inches ( 5 @.@ 1 to 12 @.@ 7 cm ) of the snowpack melted , triggering flash floods along several rivers . The Tonawanda Creek reached a height of 14 @.@ 38 ft ( 4 @.@ 38 m ) , 2 @.@ 38 ft ( 0 @.@ 73 m ) above flood stage . Several homes were inundated by flood waters throughout the region . In all , 84 @,@ 624 residences lost power in New York State . The storm system continued producing gusty winds through February 12 , which caused tree damage and power outages , and killed a construction worker in the New York City metropolitan area . The construction worker was killed after a cinder block wall collapsed due to high @-@ winds . Winds in the city gusted to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) in the Bronx . Throughout Long Island , an estimated 4 @,@ 000 people lost power . 
 = = = New Jersey , Connecticut and Massachusetts = = = 
 In New Jersey , strong winds gusted up to 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) , bringing down tree limbs that killed two people . A total of 93 @,@ 816 residences were also left without power at the height of the storm . High winds on the backside of the storm brought down a power line that sparked a small fire in Galloway Township , burning a total of 40 acres ( 16 ha ) . A total of 8 @,@ 486 Connecticut residences were left without power and one boy was injured after high winds damaged numerous power lines and tree limbs . In Massachusetts , gusts up to 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) brought down several trees and cut power to residences in Middleborough , Boston , Brookline and Hingham . The Western Massachusetts Electric Company reported that at least 360 residences lost power during the storm . Moderate snow fell across portions of The Berkshires late on February 12 as the storm system began entering the Atlantic Ocean , while isolated areas received upwards of 6 inches ( 15 cm ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the wake of the tornado outbreak law enforcement officers , including 30 national guard troops , were sent to Lone Grove to provide security . The American Red Cross opened shelters in Ardmore , Edmond , and Oklahoma City . About 100 volunteers from the Sorghum Mill Estates Neighborhood Association traveled to affected areas in Edmond to help with cleanup efforts . A local restaurant provided free meals to the volunteers as they assisted relief workers . The Salvation Army had two canteens in Oklahoma City , one in Lone Grove , and one in Perkins . About 2 @,@ 000 meals , drinks , and snacks were provided by the Salvation Army to emergency responders . Feed the Children sent two truckloads of relief supplies to Carter County . They also sent three food trucks , containing a total of 619 meals , 900 drinks , and about 500 snacks , to Ardmore . On February 22 , the New Life Baptist Church sent drinks and prepackaged snacks , along with items needed for clean @-@ up . Baptist Disaster Relief assisted in Lone Grove with food and emotional care . The Oklahoma City Thunder of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) gave away two tickets to anyone who made a donation of $ 25 or an equivalent amount of food to benefit victims of the tornado . A concert featuring Chris Cagle and other local musicians at Heritage Hall in Ardmore raised over $ 18 @,@ 000 to benefit Carter County tornado victims . Another concert set up by the Salvation Army raised $ 2 @,@ 300 more for victims . 
 The Governor of Oklahoma Brad Henry declared a State of Emergency in 17 counties and described the outbreak as the worst natural disaster he had seen since becoming governor . On February 15 , President Obama approved Henry 's request for federal assistance in Carter , Logan and Oklahoma counties . A disaster recovery center was set up by the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) on February 20 . Homeowners were allowed to borrow $ 200 @,@ 000 to repair damages to their home or find a temporary or permanent shelter . They were also allowed to borrow up to $ 40 @,@ 000 to replace lost property . Businesses were allowed to borrow up to $ 2 million for damage repair , property loss , and economic loss . By February 23 , about $ 781 @,@ 000 had been given in federal grants . On February 25 , FEMA approved Governor Henry 's request for public assistance in Carter , Coal and Love counties . The estimated cost to clear the 7 @,@ 000 tons of debris in Lone Grove was placed at $ 500 @,@ 000 , of which $ 90 @,@ 000 has been paid for by FEMA . The Department of Homeland Security offered to assist with the reconstruction of homes and businesses and to support those who were left homeless . President Barack Obama passed along his condolences and best wishes to the victims of the tornado . 
 = This Little Wiggy = 
 " This Little Wiggy " is the eighteenth episode of The Simpsons ' ninth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 22 , 1998 . It was written by Dan Greaney and directed by Neil Affleck . The episode sees Ralph Wiggum becoming friends with Bart. Phil Hartman guest stars as recurring character Troy McClure . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At a museum the family are visiting , Bart runs into Ralph Wiggum , who is in the process of being pushed into a giant ear by Kearney , Jimbo , Nelson , and Dolph . When Ralph is freed by a center employee , Marge and Chief Wiggum are there to meet him . Marge observes that Ralph has a vivid imagination and learns that he has no friends to play with ; she arranges a play @-@ date for Ralph to spend time with a horrified Bart. 
 During their play @-@ date , Bart notices that Ralph 's father has a police master key capable of opening any door in Springfield . Bart and Ralph thus steal the key and decide to enter several closed stores at night . After encountering Nelson and his gang , the boys go to a condemned penitentiary . When Ralph objects because he is afraid , the bullies leave , but not before tossing the key into the penitentiary . Ralph and Bart enter the prison to retrieve the key , and in the process stumble onto a room housing an old electric chair . After testing out the chair , the two flee when an elderly guard approaches . 
 At the Simpsons ' home , Bart and Ralph learn the penitentiary will once again be used by the town , and remember that they forgot to turn off the power . Unaware that the power is active , Mayor Quimby straps himself into the electric chair in a publicity attempt . Ralph then tells Bart that Lisa can probably figure out a way to warn the Mayor . She decides to launch a model rocket with a warning message attached and aims it toward the penitentiary . However , the rocket is blown off @-@ course and crashes through Mr. Burns ' office window . Mr. Burns reads the note and shuts off the penitentiary 's power . In the aftermath , the Simpsons congratulate Ralph , for pointing out that Lisa could solve the problem . 
 = = Production = = 
 Show runner Mike Scully had pitched an idea to Dan Greaney on Marge forcing Bart to become Ralph Wiggum 's friend . Scully gave the idea to Greaney due to his ability to write Ralph 's lines and actions well , and his overall liking of the character . 
 This episode was the second to focus on Ralph , after the fourth @-@ season episode " I Love Lisa " . Despite this , in 2007 , producer J. Stewart Burns did not believe Ralph had an episode with a plot centered on him . 
 The robot that was introduced early in the episode was influenced by Greaney 's experiences working with a USA Today themed robot . While at a baseball game with the robot , the robot led the stadium in singing " Take Me Out to the Ball Game " . The robot was not well @-@ received , and the spectators threw objects at it . The robot 's operator had to stay close to the robot during the baseball game , and was also teased and bothered in the same way as the operator in the episode . 
 Episode director Neil Affleck was praised by the staff for his directing in this episode . In the scene where Chief Wiggum falls on his back in his bedroom , unable to roll over or get back up , Affleck decided to act out the scene for the staff to showcase how Affleck envisioned Chief Wiggum 's predicament . Affleck was also praised for his ability to create three new elaborate settings in the episode : the science museum , the Springfield penitentiary , and the large toy store . 
 The episode originally did not involve Lisa helping Ralph and Bart to brainstorm an idea to alert the penitentiary . The original scene , which Greaney cites as one of his favorite scenes in the show , despite never actually being in the show , involved Bart , Ralph , and Homer trying to make a plan to save Mayor Quimby . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " This Little Wiggy " finished 27th in ratings for the week of March 16 – 22 , 1998 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 1 , equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 9 million viewing households . It was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Ally McBeal . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , enjoyed the episode , remarking : " Marvellous fun as Bart comes to realize there 's more to Ralph , or at least his daddy , than he realised . " 
 = History of Philadelphia = 
 The written history of Philadelphia begins on October 27 , 1682 , when the city was founded by William Penn in the English Crown Province of Pennsylvania between the Delaware and Schuylkill rivers . 
 = = Overview = = 
 In 1681 , King Charles II gave Penn a large piece of his newly acquired American land holdings to repay a debt the king owed to Admiral Sir William Penn , Penn 's father . This land included present @-@ day Pennsylvania and Delaware , though the claim as written would create a bloody conflict with Maryland ( dubbed Cresap 's War ) over the land grant already owned by Lord Baltimore . Penn put together a colonial expedition and fleet , which set out for America in the middle of the following summer . Penn , sailing in the vanguard , first set foot on American soil at the colony at New Castle , Delaware . An orderly change of government ensued , as was normal in an age used to the privileges and prerogatives of aristocracy and which antedated nationalism : the colonists pledged allegiance to Penn as their new Proprietor . The first general assembly was soon held in the colony . 
 Afterwards , Penn journeyed up the river and founded Philadelphia with a core group of accompanying Quakers and others seeking religious freedom on lands he purchased from the local chieftains of the Lenape or Delaware nation . This began a long period of peaceful co @-@ operation between the colony and the Delaware , in contrast to the frictions between the tribe and the Swedish and Dutch colonists . However , the new colonists would not enjoy such easy relations with the rival and territorial Conestoga peoples to the west for a number of decades as the English and Dutch German settlers attracted to the religiously tolerant colony worked their way northwest up the Schuylkill and due west south of the hill country into the breadbasket lands along the lower Susquehanna River . Lord Baltimore and the Province of Maryland had circa 1652 @-@ 53 finished waging a decade long declared war against the Susquehannocks and the Dutch , who 'd been trading them furs for tools and firearms for some time . Both groups had uneasy relations with the Delaware ( Lenape ) and the Iroquois . Furthermore , Penn 's Quaker government was not viewed favorably by the Dutch , Swedish , and English settlers in what is now Delaware . They had no " historical " allegiance to Pennsylvania , so they almost immediately began petitioning for their own Assembly . In 1704 , they achieved their goal when the three southernmost counties of Pennsylvania were permitted to split off and become the new semi @-@ autonomous colony of Lower Delaware . New Castle , the most prominent , prosperous and influential settlement in the new colony , became the capital . During its brief period of ascendancy as an empire following the victory by Gustav the Great battle of Leipzig Swedish settlers arrived in the area in the early 17th century to found a nearby colony , New Sweden in what is today southern New Jersey . With the arrival of more numerous English colonists and development of the port on the Delaware , Philadelphia quickly grew into an important colonial city . 
 During the American Revolution , it was the site of the First and Second Continental Congresses . After the Revolution , the city was chosen to be the temporary capital of the United States from 1790 @-@ 1800 . 
 At the beginning of the 19th century , the federal and state governments left Philadelphia , but the city continued for some years to be the country 's cultural and financial center . Its large free black community aided fugitive slaves and founded the first independent black denomination in the nation , the African Methodist Episcopal Church . Philadelphia became one of the first U.S. industrial centers with a variety of industries , the largest being textiles . It had many economic and family ties to the South , with southern planters maintaining second homes in the city and having business connections with banks , sending their daughters to French finishing schools run by refugees from Saint @-@ Domingue ( Haiti ) , selling their cotton to textile manufacturers , which in turn sold some products to the South , for instance , clothing for slaves . At the beginning of the American Civil War , there were many southern sympathizers , although most city residents became firmly Union as the war went on . 
 After the war , American Civil War , city government was controlled by the Republican Party ; it established a political machine that gained power through patronage . By the beginning of the 20th century , Philadelphia was described as " corrupt and contented . " Various reform efforts slowly changed city government ; in 1950 , a new city charter strengthened the position of mayor and weakened the Philadelphia City Council . Beginning during the Great Depression , voters changed from traditional support for the Republican Party to increasing support for the Democratic Party of President Franklin D. Roosevelt , which has now been predominant in local politics for many decades . 
 The population grew dramatically at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries , through immigration from Ireland , Southern Europe , Eastern Europe , and Asia , as well as the Great Migration of blacks from the rural South and Puerto Ricans from the Caribbean , all attracted to the city 's expanding industrial jobs . The Pennsylvania Railroad was expanding and hired 10 @,@ 000 workers from the South . Manufacturing plants and the US Navy Yard employed tens of thousands of industrial workers along the rivers , and the city was also a center of finance and publishing , with major universities . By the 1950s , much Philadelphia housing was aged and substandard . In the post @-@ World War II era of suburbanization and construction of area highways , many middle @-@ class families met their demand for newer housing by leaving the city for the suburbs . Population decline accompanied the industrial restructuring and the loss of tens of thousands of jobs in the mid 20th century . With increasing poverty and social dislocation in the city , gang and mafia warfare plagued the city in from the mid @-@ 20th century to the early 21st century . 
 By the end of the 20th century and beginning of the 21st , revitalization and gentrification of historic neighborhoods attracted an increase in middle @-@ class population as people began to return to the city . New immigrants from Southeast Asia , and Central and South America have contributed their energy to the city . Promotions and incentives in the 1990s and the early 21st century have improved the city 's image and created a condominium boom in Center City and the surrounding areas . 
 = = Founding = = 
 Before Philadelphia was founded , the area was inhabited by the Lenape ( Delaware ) Indians . The village of <unk> , " Place that is easy to get to , " was located in today 's Fairmount Park area . The villages of <unk> , " Where the water flows , " and Shackamaxon were located on the Delaware River . 
 The European colonization of the Delaware River Valley ( called the <unk> , meaning " South " River , or <unk> <unk> at the time ) began in 1609 when a Dutch expedition led by Henry Hudson first entered the river in search of the Northwest Passage . The Valley , including the future location of Philadelphia , became part of the New Netherland claim of the Dutch and Dutch explorer Cornelius Jacobsen Mey ( after whom Cape May , New Jersey is named ) charted the shoals Delaware Bay in the 1620s . The Dutch built a fort on the west side of the bay at <unk> . 
 In 1637 , Swedish , Dutch and German stockholders formed the New Sweden Company to trade for furs and tobacco in North America . Under the command of Peter Minuit , the company 's first expedition sailed from Sweden late in 1637 in two ships , Kalmar <unk> and Fogel <unk> . Minuit had been the governor of the New Netherland from 1626 to 1631 . Resenting his dismissal by the Dutch West India Company he had brought to the new project the knowledge that the Dutch colony had temporarily abandoned its efforts in the Delaware Valley to focus on the Hudson River valley to the north . ( The Hudson was known to the Dutch as the <unk> , or " North " river relative to " South " of the Delaware . ) Minuit and his partners further knew that the Dutch view of colonies held that actual occupation was necessary to secure legal claim . The ships reached Delaware Bay in March 1638 , and the settlers began to build a fort at the site of present @-@ day Wilmington , Delaware . They named it Fort Christina , in honor of the twelve @-@ year @-@ old Queen Christina of Sweden . It was the first permanent European settlement in the Delaware Valley . Part of this colony eventually included land on the west side of the Delaware River from just below the Schuylkill River . 
 Johan Björnsson Printz , who it had been ennobled , was appointed to be the first royal governor of New Sweden , arriving in the colony on 15 February 1643 . Under his ten @-@ year rule , the administrative center of New Sweden was moved north to Tinicum Island ( to the immediate SW of today 's Philadelphia ) , where he built Fort New Gothenburg and his own manor house which he called the <unk> . 
 The first English settlement occurred about 1642 , when 50 Puritan families from the New Haven Colony in Connecticut , led by George Lamberton , tried to establish a theocracy at the mouth of the Schuylkill River . The New Haven Colony had earlier struck a deal with the Lenape to buy much of New Jersey south of present @-@ day Trenton . The Dutch and Swedes in the area burned the English colonists ' buildings . A Swedish court under Swedish Governor Johan Björnsson Printz convicted Lamberton of " trespassing , conspiring with the Indians . " The offshoot New Haven colony received no support . The Puritan Governor John Winthrop said it was dissolved owing to summer " sickness and mortality . " The disaster contributed to New Haven 's losing control of its area to the larger Connecticut Colony . 
 In 1644 , New Sweden supported the Susquehannock in their victory in a war against the English Province of Maryland ( led by General Harrison II ) . The Dutch never recognized the legitimacy of the Swedish claim and , in the late summer of 1655 , Director @-@ General Peter Stuyvesant of New Amsterdam mustered a military expedition to the Delaware Valley to subdue the rogue colony . Though the colonists had to recognize the authority of New Netherland , the Dutch terms were tolerant . The Swedish and Finnish settlers continued to enjoy a much local autonomy , having their own militia , religion , court , and lands . This official status lasted until the English conquest of New Netherland in October 1664 , and continued unofficially until the area was included in William Penn 's charter for Pennsylvania in 1682 . By 1682 the area of modern Philadelphia was inhabited by about fifty Europeans , mostly subsistence farmers . 
 In 1681 , as part of a repayment of a debt , Charles II of England granted William Penn a charter for what would become the Pennsylvania colony . Shortly after receiving the charter , Penn said he would lay out " a large Towne or Citty in the most <unk> place upon the Delaware River for health & Navigation . " Penn wanted the city to live peacefully in the area , without a fortress or walls , so he bought the land from the Lenape . The legend is that Penn made a treaty of friendship with Lenape chief Tammany under an elm tree at Shackamaxon , in what became the city 's Kensington District . 
 Penn envisioned a city where all people regardless of religion could worship freely and live together . Being a Quaker , Penn had experienced religious persecution . He also planned that the city 's streets would be set up in a grid , with the idea that the city would be more like the rural towns of England than its crowded cities . The homes would be spread far apart and surrounded by gardens and orchards . The city granted the first purchasers land along the Delaware River for their homes . It had access to the Delaware Bay and Atlantic Ocean , and became an important port in the Thirteen Colonies . He named the city Philadelphia ( <unk> , " love " or " friendship " , and <unk> , " brother " ) ; it was to have a commercial center for a market , state house , and other key buildings . 
 Penn sent three commissioners to supervise the settlement and to set aside 10 @,@ 000 acres ( 40 km ² ) for the city . The commissioners bought land from Swedes at the settlement of <unk> , and from there began to lay out the city toward the north . The area went about a mile along the Delaware River between modern South and Vine Streets . Penn 's ship anchored off the coast of New Castle , Delaware , on October 27 , 1682 , and he arrived in Philadelphia a few days after that . He expanded the city west to the bank of the Schuylkill River , for a total of 1 @,@ 200 acres ( 4 @.@ 8 km ² ) . Streets were laid out in a gridiron system . Except for the two widest streets , High ( now Market ) and Broad , the streets were named after prominent landowners who owned adjacent lots . The streets were renamed in 1684 ; the ones running east @-@ west were named after local trees ( Vine , Sassafras , Mulberry , Cherry , Chestnut , Walnut , Locust , Spruce , Pine , Lombard , and Cedar ) and the north @-@ south streets were numbered . Within the area , four squares ( now named Rittenhouse , Logan , Washington and Franklin ) were set aside as parks open for everyone . Penn designed a central square at the intersection of Broad and what is now Market Street to be surrounded by public buildings . 
 Some of the first settlers lived in caves dug out of the river bank , but the city grew with construction of homes , churches , and wharves . The new landowners did not share Penn 's vision of a non @-@ congested city . Most people bought land along the Delaware River instead of spreading westward towards the Schuylkill . The lots they bought were subdivided and resold with smaller streets constructed between them . Before 1704 , few people lived west of Fourth Street . 
 = = Early growth = = 
 Philadelphia grew from a few hundred inhabitants in 1683 to over 2 @,@ 500 in 1701 . The population was mostly English , Welsh , Irish , Germans , Swedes , Finns , Dutch , and African slaves . Before William Penn left Philadelphia for the last time on October 25 , 1701 he issued the Charter of 1701 . The charter established Philadelphia as a city and gave the mayor , aldermen , and councilmen the authority to issue laws and ordinances and regulate markets and fairs . The first known Jewish resident of Philadelphia was Jonas Aaron , a German who moved to the city in 1703 . He is mentioned in an article entitled " A Philadelphia Business Directory of 1703 , " by Charles H. Browning . It was published in The American Historical Register , in April , 1895 . 
 Philadelphia became an important trading center and major port . Initially the city 's main source of trade was with the West Indies , which had established sugar cane plantations . It was part of the Triangle Trade , associated with Africa and the British Isles . During Queen Anne 's War ( 1702 and 1713 ) with the French , trade was cut off to the West Indies , hurting Philadelphia financially . The end of the war brought brief prosperity to all of the British territories , but a depression in the 1720s stunted Philadelphia 's growth . The 1720s and ' 30s saw immigration from mostly Germany and northern Ireland to Philadelphia and the surrounding countryside . The region was developed for agriculture and Philadelphia exported grains , lumber products and flax seeds to Europe and elsewhere in the American colonies ; this pulled the city out of the depression . 
 Philadelphia 's pledge of religious tolerance attracted many other religions beside Quakers . Mennonites , <unk> , Anglicans , Catholics , and Jews moved to the city and soon outnumbered the Quakers , but they continued to be powerful economically and politically . Political tensions existed between and within the religious groups , which also had national connections . Riots in 1741 and 1742 took place over high bread prices and drunken sailors . In October 1742 and the " Bloody Election " riots , sailors attacked Quakers and pacifist Germans , whose peace politics were strained by the War of Jenkins ' Ear . The city was plagued by pickpockets and other petty criminals . Working in the city government had such a poor reputation that fines were imposed on citizens who refused to serve an office after being chosen . One man fled Philadelphia to avoid serving as mayor . 
 In the first half the 18th century , like other American cities , Philadelphia was dirty , with garbage and animals littering the streets . The roads were unpaved and in rainy seasons impassable . Early attempts to improve quality of life were ineffective as laws were poorly enforced . By the 1750s , Philadelphia was turning into a major city . Christ Church and the Pennsylvania State House , better known as Independence Hall , were built . Streets were paved and illuminated with oil lamps . Philadelphia 's first newspaper , Andrew Bradford 's American Weekly Mercury , began publishing on December 22 , 1719 . 
 The city also developed culturally and scientifically . Schools , libraries and theaters were founded . James Logan arrived in Philadelphia in 1701 as a secretary for William Penn . He was the first to help establish Philadelphia as a place of culture and learning . Logan , who was the mayor of Philadelphia in the early 1720s , created one of the largest libraries in the colonies . He also helped guide other prominent Philadelphia residents , which included botanist John Bartram and Benjamin Franklin . Benjamin Franklin arrived in Philadelphia in October 1723 and would play a large part in the city 's development . To help protect the city from fire , Franklin founded the Union Fire Company . In the 1750s Franklin was named one of the city 's post master generals and he established postal routes between Philadelphia , New York , Boston , and elsewhere . He helped raise money to build the American colonies ' first hospital , which opened in 1752 . That same year the College of Philadelphia , another project of Franklin 's , received its charter of incorporation . Threatened by French and Spanish privateers , Franklin and others set up a volunteer group for defense and built two batteries . 
 When the French and Indian War began in 1754 as part of the Seven Years ' War , Franklin recruited militias . During the war , the city attracted many refugees from the western frontier . When Pontiac 's Rebellion occurred in 1763 , refugees again fled into the city , including a group of Lenape hiding from other Native Americans , angry at their pacifism , and white frontiersmen . The Paxton Boys tried to follow them into Philadelphia for attacks , but was prevented by the city 's militia and Franklin , who convinced them to leave . 
 = = Revolution = = 
 In the 1760s , the British Parliament 's passage of the Stamp Act and the Townshend Acts , combined with other frustrations , increased political tension and anger against England in the colonies . Philadelphia residents joined boycotts of British goods . After the Tea Act in 1773 , there were threats against anyone who would store tea and any ships that brought tea up the Delaware . After the Boston Tea Party , a shipment of tea had arrived in December , on the ship the Polly . A committee told the captain to depart without unloading his cargo . 
 A series of acts in 1774 further angered the colonies ; activists called for a general congress and they agreed to meet in Philadelphia . The First Continental Congress was held in September in Carpenters ' Hall . After the American Revolutionary War began in April 1775 following the Battles of Lexington and Concord , the Second Continental Congress met in May at the Pennsylvania State House . There they also met a year later to write and sign the Declaration of Independence in July 1776 . Philadelphia was important to the war effort ; Robert Morris said , 
 You will consider Philadelphia , from its <unk> situation , the extent of its commerce , the number of its artificers , manufactures and other circumstances , to be to the United States what the heart is to the human body in circulating the blood . 
 The port city was vulnerable to attack by the British by sea . Officials recruited soldiers and studied defenses for invasion from Delaware Bay , but built no forts or other installations . In March 1776 two British frigates began a blockade of the mouth of Delaware Bay ; British soldiers were moving south through New Jersey from New York . In December fear of invasion caused half the population to flee the city , including the Continental Congress , which moved to Baltimore . General George Washington pushed back the British advance at the battles of Princeton and Trenton , and the refugees and Congress returned . In September 1777 , the British invaded Philadelphia from the south . Washington intercepted them at the Battle of Brandywine but was driven back . Thousands fled north into Pennsylvania and east into New Jersey ; Congress moved to Lancaster then to York . British troops marched into the half @-@ empty Philadelphia on September 23 to cheering Loyalist crowds . 
 The occupation lasted ten months . After the French entered the war on the side of the Continentals , the last British troops pulled out of Philadelphia on June 18 , 1778 , to help defend New York City . Continentals arrived the same day and reoccupied the city supervised by Major General Benedict Arnold , who had been appointed the city 's military commander . The city government returned a week later , and the Continental Congress returned in early July . 
 Historian Gary B. Nash emphasizes the role of the working class , and their distrust of their betters , in northern ports . He argues that working class artisans and skilled craftsmen made up a radical element in Philadelphia that took control of the city starting about 1770 and promoted a radical Democratic form of government during the revolution . They held power for a while , and used their control of the local militia disseminate their ideology to the working class and to stay in power until the businessmen staged a conservative counterrevolution . Philadelphia suffered serious inflation , causing problems especially for the poor , who were unable to buy needed goods . This led to unrest in 1779 , with people blaming the upper class and Loyalists . A riot in January by sailors striking for higher wages ended up with their attacking and dismantling ships . In the Fort Wilson Riot of October 4 , men attacked James Wilson , a signer of the Declaration of Independence who was accused of being a Loyalist sympathizer . Soldiers broke up the riot , but five people died and 17 were injured . 
 = = Temporary capital = = 
 Following the Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1783 , the United States Congress moved out of Philadelphia and settled in New York City , designated as the temporary capital . Besides the Constitutional Convention in May 1787 , United States politics was no longer centered in Philadelphia . Due to political compromise , Congress chose a permanent capital to be built along the Potomac River . Philadelphia was selected as the temporary United States capital for ten years starting in 1790 . Congress occupied the Philadelphia County Courthouse , which became known as Congress Hall , and the Supreme Court worked at City Hall . Robert Morris donated his home at 6th and Market Street as the residence for President Washington , or the President 's House ( Philadelphia ) . 
 = = = Yellow fever 1793 = = = 
 After 1787 the city 's economy grew rapidly in the postwar years . Serious yellow fever outbreaks in the 1790s interrupted development . Benjamin Rush identified an outbreak in August 1793 as a yellow fever epidemic , the first in 30 years , which lasted four months . Two thousand refugees from Saint @-@ Domingue had recently arrived in the city in flight from the Haitian Revolution . They represented five percent of the city 's total population . They likely carried the disease from the island where it was endemic , and it was rapidly transmitted by mosquito bites to other residents . Fear of contracting the disease caused 20 @,@ 000 residents to flee the city by mid @-@ September , and some neighboring towns prohibited their entry . Trade virtually stopped ; Baltimore and New York quarantined people and goods from Philadelphia . People feared entering the city or interacting with its residents . The fever finally abated at the end of October with the onset of colder weather and was declared at an end by mid @-@ November . The death toll was 4 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 , in a population of 50 @,@ 000 . Yellow fever outbreaks recurred in Philadelphia and other major ports through the nineteenth century , but none had as many fatalities as that of 1793 . The 1798 epidemic in Philadelphia also prompted an exodus ; an estimated 1 @,@ 292 residents died . 
 = = = Slavery = = = 
 Pennsylvania , which had abolished slavery in 1780 , required any slaves brought to the city to be freed after six months ' residency . The state law was challenged by French colonial refugees from Saint @-@ Domingue , who brought slaves with them , but defended by the Pennsylvania Abolition Society . Through 1796 , 500 slaves from Saint @-@ Domingue gained freedom in the city . Because of the violence accompanying the revolution on the island , Philadelphians , many of whom had southern ties , and residents of the Upper South worried that free people of color would encourage slave insurrections in the U.S. 
 During the city 's 10 years as federal capital , members of Congress were exempt from the abolition law , but the many slaveholders in the executive and judicial branches were not . President Washington , vice @-@ president Jefferson and others brought slaves as domestic servants , and evaded the law by regularly shifting their slaves out of the city before the 6 @-@ month deadline . Two of Washington 's slaves escaped from the President 's House ( Philadelphia ) , and he gradually replaced his slaves with German immigrants who were indentured servants . The remains of the President 's House ( Philadelphia ) were found during excavation for a new Liberty Bell Center , leading to archeological work in 2007 . In 2010 , a memorial on the site opened to commemorate Washington 's slaves and African Americans in Philadelphia and U.S. history , as well as to mark the house site . 
 = = Industrial growth = = 
 The Pennsylvania state government left Philadelphia in 1799 and the United States government left in 1800 . By this time , the city had become one of the United States ' busiest ports and the country 's largest city , with 67 @,@ 787 people living in Philadelphia and its contiguous suburbs . Philadelphia 's maritime trade was interrupted by the Embargo Act of 1807 and then the War of 1812 . After the war , Philadelphia 's shipping industry never returned to its pre @-@ embargo status , and New York City succeeded it as the busiest port and largest city . 
 The embargo and decrease in foreign trade led to the development of local factories to produce goods no longer available as imports . Manufacturing plants and foundries were built and Philadelphia became an important center of paper @-@ related industries and the leather , shoe , and boot industries . Coal and iron mines , and the construction of new roads , canals , and railroads helped Philadelphia 's manufacturing power grow , and the city became the United States ' first major industrial city . Major industrial projects included the Waterworks , iron water pipes , a gasworks , and the U.S. Naval Yard . In response to exploitative working conditions , some 20 @,@ 000 Philadelphia workers staged the first general strike in North America in 1835 , in which workers in the city won the ten @-@ hour workday and an increase in wages . In addition to its industrial power , Philadelphia was the financial center of the country . Along with chartered and private banks , the city was the home of the First and Second Banks of the United States , Mechanics National Bank and the first U.S. Mint . Cultural institutions , such as the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts , the Academy of Natural Sciences , the Athenaeum and the Franklin Institute also developed in the nineteenth century . The Pennsylvania General Assembly passed the Free School Law of 1834 to create the public school system . 
 = = = Ethnic rivalries = = = 
 In the mid and late 1840s , immigrants from Ireland and Germany streamed into the city , swelling the population of Philadelphia and its suburbs . In Philadelphia , as the rich moved west of 7th Street , the poor moved into the upper class ' former homes , which were converted into tenements and boarding houses . Many small row houses crowded alleyways and small streets , and these areas were filthy , filled with garbage and the smell of manure from animal pens . During the 1840s and 1850s , hundreds died each year in Philadelphia and the surrounding districts from diseases such as malaria , smallpox , tuberculosis , and cholera , related to poor sanitation and diseases brought by immigrants ; the poor suffered the most fatalities . Small rowhouses and tenement housing were constructed south of South Street . 
 Violence was a serious problem . Gangs like the <unk> Killers and the Blood Tubs controlled various neighborhoods . During the 1840s and early 1850s when volunteer fire companies , some of which were infiltrated by gangs , responded to a fire , fights with other fire companies often broke out . The lawlessness among fire companies virtually ended in 1853 and 1854 when the city took more control over their <unk> during the 1840s and 50s violence was directed against immigrants by people who feared their competition for jobs and resented newcomers of different religions and ethnicity . <unk> often held mostly anti @-@ Catholic , anti @-@ Irish meetings . Violence against immigrants also occurred , the worst being the nativist riots in 1844 . Violence against African Americans was also common during the 1830s , 40s , and 50s . Immigrants competed with them for jobs , and deadly race riots resulted in the burning of African @-@ American homes and churches . In 1841 , Joseph Sturge commented " ... there is probably no city in the known world where dislike , amounting to the hatred of the coloured population , prevails more than in the city of brotherly love ! " Several anti @-@ slavery societies had been formed and free blacks , Quakers and other abolitionists operated safe houses associated with the Underground Railroad , but working class and ethnic whites opposed the abolitionist movement . 
 The lawlessness and the difficulty in controlling it , along with residential development just north of Philadelphia , led to the Act of Consolidation in 1854 . The act passed on February 2 , making Philadelphia 's borders coterminous with Philadelphia County , and incorporating various subdistrict within the county . 
 Once the American Civil War began in 1861 , Philadelphia 's southern leanings were reduced . Popular hostility shifted against southern sympathizers . Mobs threatened a secessionist newspaper and the homes of suspected sympathizers , and were only turned away by the police and Mayor Alexander Henry . Philadelphia supported the war with soldiers , ammunition , and war ships and its manufacturers produced many army uniforms . Philadelphia was also a major receiving place of the wounded , with more than 157 @,@ 000 soldiers and sailors treated within the city . Philadelphia began preparing for invasion in 1863 , but the Confederate Army was repelled by Union forces at Gettysburg . 
 = = Late 19th century = = 
 In the years following the Civil War , Philadelphia 's population continued to grow . The population grew from 565 @,@ 529 in 1860 to 674 @,@ 022 in 1870 . By 1876 the city 's population stood at 817 @,@ 000 . The dense population areas were not only growing north and south along the Delaware River , but also moving westward across the Schuylkill River . A large portion of the growth came from immigrants , still mostly Irish and German . In 1870 , twenty @-@ seven percent of Philadelphia 's population was born outside the United States . 
 In February 1854 , the Act of Consolidation made the city of Philadelphia inclusive of the entire county , doing away with all other municipalities . 
 By the 1880s immigration from Russia , Eastern Europe , and Italy started rivaling immigration from Western Europe . Many of the immigrants from Russia and Eastern Europe were Jewish . In 1881 there were around 5 @,@ 000 Jews in the city , and by 1905 the number had increased to 100 @,@ 000 . Philadelphia 's Italian population grew from around 300 in 1870 to around 18 @,@ 000 in 1900 , with the majority settling in South Philadelphia . Along with foreign immigration , domestic migration by African Americans from the South led to Philadelphia having the largest black population of a Northern U.S. city in this period . By 1876 , nearly 25 @,@ 000 African Americans living in Philadelphia , and by 1890 the population was near 40 @,@ 000 . While immigrants moved into the city , Philadelphia 's rich left for newer housing in the suburbs , with commuting made easy by newly constructed railroads . During the 1880s much of Philadelphia 's upper class moved into the growing suburbs along the Pennsylvania Railroad 's Main Line west of the city . 
 Politically the city was dominated by the Republican Party , which had developed a strong political machine . The Republicans dominated the post @-@ war elections , and corrupt officials made their way into the government and continued to control the city through voter fraud and intimidation . The Gas Trust was the hub of the city ’ s political machine . The trust controlled the gas company supplying lighting to the city . With the board under complete control by Republicans in 1865 , they awarded contracts and perks for themselves and their cronies . Some government reform did occur during this time . The police department was reorganized ; and volunteer fire companies were eliminated and were replaced by a paid fire department . A compulsory school act passed in 1895 , and the Public School Reorganization Act freed the city 's education from the political machine . Higher education changed as well . The University of Pennsylvania moved to West Philadelphia and reorganized to its modern form ; and Temple University , Drexel University and the Free Library were founded . 
 The city 's major project was organizing and staging the Centennial Exposition , the first World 's Fair in the United States , which celebrated the nation 's Centennial . Held in Fairmount Park , exhibits included Alexander Graham Bell 's telephone and the Corliss Steam Engine . Beginning May 10 , 1876 , by the end of the Exposition on November 10 , more than nine million people had visited the fair . The city undertook construction of a new city hall , designed to match its ambitions . The project was graft @-@ ridden and it took twenty @-@ three years to complete . At completion in 1884 , City Hall was the tallest building in Philadelphia , a position it maintained for nearly 100 years . 
 Philadelphia 's major industries of the era were the Baldwin Locomotive Works , William Cramp and Sons Ship and Engine Building Company , and the Pennsylvania Railroad . Westward expansion of the Pennsylvania Railroad helped Philadelphia keep up with nearby New York City in domestic commerce , as both cities fought for dominance in transporting iron and coal resources from Pennsylvania . Philadelphia 's other local railroad was the Reading Railroad , but after a series of bankruptcies , it was taken over by New Yorkers . The Panic of 1873 , which occurred when the New York City branch of the Philadelphia bank Jay Cooke and Company failed , and another panic in the 1890s hampered Philadelphia 's economic growth . While the depressions hurt the city , its diverse array of industries helped it weather difficult times . It had numerous iron and steel @-@ related manufacturers , including Philadelphian @-@ owned iron and steel works outside the city , most notably the Bethlehem Iron Company in the city by that name . The largest industry in Philadelphia was textiles . Philadelphia produced more textiles than any other U.S. city ; in 1904 the textile industry employed more than 35 percent of the city 's workers . The cigar , sugar , and oil industries also were strong in the city . During this time the major department stores : Wanamaker 's , <unk> , Strawbridge and Clothier , and Lit Brothers , were developed along Market Street . 
 By the end of the century , the city provided nine municipal swimming pools , making it a leader in the nation . 
 = = Early 20th century = = 
 In the beginning of the 20th century Philadelphia had taken on a poor reputation . People both inside and outside of the city commented that Philadelphia and its citizens were dull and contented with its lack of change . Harper 's Magazine commented that " The one thing unforgivable in Philadelphia is to be new , to be different from what has been . " Along with an image of " dullness , " Philadelphia was known for its political corruption . The Republican @-@ controlled political machine , run by Israel Durham , permeated all parts of city government . One official estimated that US $ 5 million was wasted each year from graft in the city 's infrastructure programs . The majority of residents were Republican , but voter fraud and bribery were still common . In 1905 the city enacted election reforms , such as personal voter registration and the establishing primaries for all city offices . But , residents became complacent , and the city 's political bosses continued in control . After 1907 Boss Durham retired and his successor , James McNichol , never controlled much outside North Philadelphia . The Vare brothers , George , Edwin , and William , had created their own organization in South Philadelphia . With no central authority , Senator Boies Penrose took charge . In 1910 infighting between McNichol and the <unk> contributed to the reform candidate , Rudolph <unk> , to be elected mayor . During his administration , he made numerous cost @-@ cutting measures and improvements to city services , but he served only one term . The machine again gained control . 
 The policies of Woodrow Wilson 's administration reunited reformers with the city 's Republican Party and World War I temporarily halted the reform movement . In 1917 the murder of George Eppley , a police officer defending City Council primary candidate James Carey , ignited the reformers again . They passed legislation to reduce the City Council from two houses to one , and provided council members an annual salary . With the deaths of McNichol in 1917 and Penrose in 1921 , William Vare became the city 's political boss . In the 1920s the public flouting of Prohibition laws , mob violence , and police involvement in illegal activities led Mayor W. Freeland Kendrick to appoint Brigadier General Smedley Butler of the U.S. Marine Corps as director of public safety . Butler cracked down on bars and speakeasies and tried to stop corruption within the police force , but demand for liquor and political pressure made the job difficult , and he had little success . After two years , Butler left in January 1926 and most of his police reforms were repealed . On August 1 , 1928 , Boss Vare suffered a stroke , and two weeks later a grand jury investigation into the city 's mob violence and other crimes began . Numerous police officers were dismissed or arrested as a result of the investigation , but no permanent change resulted . Strong support among some residents for the Democratic presidential candidate Al Smith , who was Catholic , marked the city 's turning away in the 20th century from the Republican Party . 
 Philadelphia continued to grow with immigrants coming from Eastern Europe and Italy , as well as African American migrants from the South . Foreign immigration was briefly interrupted by World War I. The demand for labor for the city 's factories , including the new U.S. Naval Yard at Hog Island , which constructed ships , trains , and other items needed in the war effort , helped attract blacks in the Great Migration ( African American ) . In September 1918 , cases of the influenza pandemic were reported at the Naval Yard and began to spread . Mortality on some days was several hundred people and , by the time the pandemic began to subside in October , more than 12 @,@ 000 people had died . 
 The rising popularity of automobiles led to widening of roads and creation of Northeast ( Roosevelt ) Boulevard in 1914 , the Benjamin Franklin Parkway in 1918 , the changing of many existing streets to one @-@ way streets in the early 1920s , and construction of the Delaware River ( Benjamin Franklin ) Bridge to New Jersey in 1926 . Philadelphia began to modernize , steel and concrete skyscrapers were constructed , old buildings were wired for electricity , and the city 's first commercial radio station was founded . In 1907 the city constructed the first subway . It hosted the <unk> @-@ Centennial Exposition in South Philadelphia , and in 1928 opened the Philadelphia Museum of Art . 
 = = Great Depression and World War II = = 
 In the three years after the stock market crashed in 1929 , 50 Philadelphia banks closed . Of those only two were large , Albert M. Greenfield 's Bankers Trust Company and the Franklin Trust Company . Savings and loan associations also faced trouble , with mortgages of 19 @,@ 000 properties being foreclosed in 1932 alone . By 1934 , 1 @,@ 600 of 3 @,@ 400 savings and loan associations had shut down . From 1929 to 1933 , regional manufacturing fell by 45 percent ; factory payrolls fell by 60 percent ; retail sales fell by 40 percent . Worst hit of all was construction , where payrolls dropped 84 percent . Unemployment peaked in 1933 , when 11 @.@ 5 percent of whites , 16 @.@ 2 percent of African Americans , and 19 @.@ 1 percent of foreign @-@ born whites were out of work . Mayor J. Hampton Moore blamed people 's economic woes , not on the worldwide Great Depression , but on laziness and wastefulness , and claimed there was no starvation in the city . Soon after , he fired 3 @,@ 500 city workers , instituted pay cuts , forced unpaid vacation , and reduced the number of contracts the city awarded . This saved Philadelphia millions of dollars , and the efforts kept the city from defaulting on its debts , but were unpopular among the unemployed . The city relied on state money to fund relief efforts . Moore 's successor S. Davis Wilson instituted numerous programs financed by Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal 's Works Progress Administration , despite condemning the program during his mayoral campaign . At the peak of WPA @-@ financed jobs in 1936 , 40 @,@ 000 Philadelphians were employed under the program . 
 With encouragement from the state government and labor 's founding of the Congress of Industrial Organizations ( CIO ) , Philadelphia became a union city . Many trade unions discriminated against African Americans for years , and they were closed out of some labor advances . Workers ' dissatisfaction with conditions led to numerous strikes in the textile unions , and the CIO organized labor in other industries , with more strikes taking place . During the 1930s , the Democratic Party began to grow in Philadelphia , influenced by the leadership of the Roosevelt administration during the Depression . A newly organized Independent Democratic Committee reached out to residents . In 1936 , the Democratic National Convention was held in Philadelphia . The majority of voters in the city reelected the Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt as president ; they also voted for Democratic Congressmen and state representatives . City government continued to be dominated by Republicans , but the politicians were elected by small margins . 
 The beginning of World War II in Europe and the threat of the U.S. becoming involved generated new jobs in defense @-@ related industries . After the U.S. became involved in the war in 1941 , the city mobilized . Philadelphia consistently met war bond quotas and when the war ended in 1945 , 183 @,@ 850 residents were in the U.S. armed forces . With so many men serving in the military , there had been a labor shortage ; businesses and industries hired women and workers from outside the city . In 1944 the Philadelphia Transportation Company promoted African Americans to positions as motormen and conductors ( from which they had previously been excluded ) on public transportation vehicles . Resentful , other PTC workers protested and began a strike that nearly immobilized the city . President Roosevelt sent troops to replace the striking workers . After a federal ultimatum , the workers returned after six days . 
 = = Reform and decline = = 
 After World War II ended , Philadelphia had a serious housing shortage . Around half of the city 's housing had been built in the 19th century , and many units lacked proper sanitary facilities , were overcrowded , and in poor condition . Competition for housing , as African Americans ( many had come to the city in the Great Migration from the South ) and Puerto Ricans moved into new neighborhoods , resulted in racial tension . The wealthier middle @-@ class residents , often white , continued to move out to the suburbs in what became called white flight . 
 The population peaked at more than two million residents in 1950 ; afterward the city 's population declined while that of the neighboring suburban counties grew . Some residents moved out of the region altogether due to restructuring of industry and loss of tens of thousands of jobs in the city . Philadelphia lost five percent of its population in the 1950s , three percent in the 1960s and more than thirteen percent in the 1970s . Manufacturing and other major Philadelphia businesses , which had supported middle @-@ class lives for the working class , were moving out of the area or shutting down in industrial restructuring , including major declines in railroads . 
 The city encouraged development projects in University City in West Philadelphia and the area around Temple University in North Philadelphia , it removed the " Chinese Wall " elevated railway , and developed Market Street East around the transportation hub . Some gentrification occurred , with restoration of properties in historic neighborhoods such as Society Hill , Rittenhouse Square , Queen Village , and the Fairmount area . The airport expanded , the Schuylkill Expressway and the Delaware Expressway ( Interstate 95 ) were built , SEPTA was formed , and residential and industrial development took place in Northeast Philadelphia . 
 Preparations for the United States Bicentennial in 1976 began in 1964 . By the early 1970s , US $ 3 million had been spent but no plans were set . The planning group was reorganized and numerous city @-@ wide events were planned . Independence National Historical Park was restored and development of Penn 's Landing was completed . Less than half the expected visitors came to the city for the Bicentennial , but the event helped revive the identity of the city , inspiring annual neighborhood events and fairs . 
 In 1947 Richardson Dilworth was selected as the Democratic candidate , but lost to incumbent mayor Bernard Samuel . During the campaign Dilworth made numerous specific charges about corruption within city government . The City Council set up a committee to investigate , with findings followed by a grand jury investigation . The five @-@ year investigation and its findings garnered national attention . US $ 40 million in city spending was found to be unaccounted for , and the president judge of the Court of Common pleas had been tampering with court cases . The fire marshal went to prison ; and an official in the tax collection office , a water department employee , a plumbing inspector , and head of the police vice squad each committed suicide after criminal exposures . The public and the press demanded reform and by the end of 1950 , a new city charter was drafted . The new charter strengthened the position of the mayor and weakened the City Council . The Council would be made of ten councilmen elected by district and seven at large . City administration was streamlined and new boards and commissions were created . 
 In 1951 Joseph S. Clark was elected as the first Democratic mayor in 80 years . Clark filled administration positions based on merit and worked to weed out corruption . Despite reforms and the Clark administration , a powerful Democratic patronage organization eventually replaced the old Republican one . Clark was succeeded by Richardson Dilworth , who continued the policies of his predecessor . Dilworth resigned to run for governor in 1962 , and city council president James H. J. Tate was elected as the city 's first Irish Catholic mayor . Tate was elected mayor in 1963 and reelected in 1967 despite opposition from reformers who opposed him as an organization insider . 
 As elsewhere in major US cities , the 1960s was a turbulent decade for the city . Numerous civil rights and anti @-@ war protests took place , including large protests led by Marie Hicks to desegregate Girard College . Students took over the Community College of Philadelphia in a sit @-@ in , race riots broke out in <unk> Prison , and a 1964 riot along West Columbia Avenue killed two people , injured over 300 and caused around US $ 3 million in damages . Crime was also a serious problem . Primarily drug @-@ related gang warfare plagued the city , and in 1970 crime was rated the city 's number one problem in a City Planning Commission survey . The court system was overtaxed and the tactics of the police department under Police Commissioner Frank Rizzo were controversial . Frank Rizzo was credited with preventing the level of violence seen in other cities at the time and was elected mayor in 1971 . 
 The outspoken Rizzo , who was reelected in 1975 , was a divisive figure who had loyal supporters and passionate opponents . Police and fire departments and cultural institutions were well supported under Rizzo , but other city departments like the Free Library , the Department of Welfare and Recreation , the City Planning Commission and the Streets Department experienced large cuts . The radical group called MOVE formed in 1972 , and tension soon developed with city officials . The first major clash occurred in 1978 at the group 's <unk> Village headquarters , resulting in the death of a police officer . Nine MOVE members were convicted at trial and sentenced to prison . In 1985 a stand @-@ off occurred at the group 's new headquarters in Southwest Philadelphia , whose residents were believed to be armed resisters . The police dropped a satchel bomb on the house from a helicopter ; it set off a fire that killed eleven MOVE members , including five children , and destroyed sixty @-@ two neighboring houses . Survivors sued the city in civil court and won damages . 
 Crime continued to be a problem in the 1980s . Deadly Mafia warfare plagued South Philadelphia , drug gangs and crack houses invaded the slums of the city , and the murder rate skyrocketed . William J. Green became mayor in 1980 , and in 1984 W. Wilson Goode became Philadelphia 's first African @-@ American mayor . Development continued in areas in Old City and South Street , and large modern skyscrapers of glass and granite , designed by nationally known architects , were constructed in Center City . City employee labor contracts signed during the Rizzo administration helped set up a city financial crisis that Green and Goode were unable to prevent . The city was near bankruptcy at the end of the 1980s . 
 A group of Hmong refugees had settled in Philadelphia after the end of the 1970s Laotian Civil War associated with the Vietnam War . They were attacked in discriminatory acts , and the city 's Commission on Human Relations held hearings on the incidents . Anne Fadiman , author of The Spirit Catches You and You Fall Down , said that lower @-@ class residents resented the Hmong receiving a $ 100 @,@ 000 federal grant for employment assistance when they were also out of work ; they believed that American citizens should be getting assistance . Between 1982 and 1984 , three quarters of the Hmong people who had settled in Philadelphia left for other cities in the United States to join relatives who were already there . Vietnamese and other immigrants from Asia have settled in the city , many near the Italian Market area . In addition , numerous Hispanic immigrants from Central and South America have entered the city , settling in North Philadelphia . 
 = = Into the 21st century = = 
 In 1992 Ed Rendell was elected as the city 's first Jewish mayor . At the time , the city had numerous unpaid bills , the lowest bond rating of the top fifty largest U.S. cities , and a budget deficit of US $ 250 million . Rendell attracted investment in the city , stabilized the city 's finances , and produced small budget surpluses . Revitalization of parts of Philadelphia continued in the 1990s . In 1993 , a new convention center was opened , creating a hotel boom with seventeen hotels opening between 1998 and 2000 when the city hosted the Republican National Convention . The city began promoting heritage tourism , and producing festivals and entertainment to attract tourists . In 2005 National Geographic Traveler named Philadelphia America 's Next Great City , citing its recent revitalization and general compact cityscape . 
 Former city council president John F. Street was elected mayor in 1999 and city revitalization continued into the 21st century . The Street administration targeted some of the city 's worst neighborhoods for revitalization and made considerable progress . Tax breaks created in 1997 and 2000 helped create a condominium boom in Center City , increasing the population of Center City and helping slow the city 's 40 @-@ year population decline . The population of Center City rose to 88 @,@ 000 in 2005 from 78 @,@ 000 in 2000 and the number of households grew by 24 percent . 
 The city has had struggles : a series of scandals in the 1990s plagued the police department , including underreporting of crime . The Street administration was plagued with scandal , with administration people being accused of awarding contracts based on campaign donations for Street 's 2003 reelection campaign . The 2000s had a rise of violent crime after a decline in the 1990s . In 2006 Philadelphia 's murder rate was 27 @.@ 8 per 100 @,@ 000 inhabitants versus a rate of 18 @.@ 9 in 2002 . 
 In 2008 Michael Nutter , with a background in business , was elected as the city 's third African @-@ American mayor . As of July 2009 , he oversaw a decrease in the crime rate by 30 % since July 2007 . Tourism has become one of the city 's main industries ; Philadelphia is now the 10th @-@ most visited city in the US ( behind Atlanta and ahead of Miami , Dallas , and Boston ) . Nutter was instrumental in Philadelphia 's Foreclosure Prevention Program , a program which has been copied by many cities throughout the country to stabilize their housing and retain residents in owned units . 
 As part of Pope Francis ' visit to the United States , directly after his visit to Cuba , Francis was to visit New York City , Washington , D.C. , and Philadelphia . In Philadelphia , Francis attended The 2015 World Meeting of Families , coordinated by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Philadelphia . Pope Francis ended his first Papal visit to the U.S. by saying mass to a crowd of 1 million people on the Benjamin Franklin Parkway . While in Philadelphia , Francis attended many events , including a speech to a crowd of 50 @,@ 000 people at Independence Hall and a visit and blessing at Saint Joseph 's University . 
 = = = City directories and old sources = = = 
 H.C. Carey & I. Lea ( 1824 ) , Philadelphia in 1824 ; or , a brief account of the various institutions and public objects in this metropolis , being a complete guide for strangers , Philadelphia , PA , USA : H.C. Carey & I. Lea 
 City Directory . 1785 ; 1791 ; 1795 ; 1799 ; 1800 ; 1801 ; 1802 ; 1808 ; 1810 ; 1819 ; 1822 ; 1825 ; 1837 ; 1841 ; 1849 ; 1856 ; 1857 ; 1858 ; 1861 ; 1866 ; 1867 
 Watson , John Fanning ( 1855 ) , Annals of Philadelphia and Pennsylvania : being a collection of memoirs , anecdotes , and incidents of the city and its inhabitants , and of the earliest settlements of the inland part of Pennsylvania , from the days of the founders 1 , Philadelphia , PA , USA : Parry and M <unk> 
 Bowen , Daniel ( 1839 ) , A history of Philadelphia , Philadelphia , PA , USA : Daniel Bowen 
 S.S. Moore ; T.W. Jones ( 1804 ) , " Philadelphia " , The traveller 's directory : or , A pocket companion , shewing the course of the main road from Philadelphia to New York ; and from Philadelphia to Washington ... from actual survey ( 2nd ed . ) , Philadelphia : Printed for Mathew Carey , OCLC <unk> 
 Myers , Albert Cook ( 1912 ) , " Narratives of Early Pennsylvania , West New Jersey and Delaware , 1630 – 1707 " , Jameson , J. Franklin ( editor ) : Original Narratives of Early American History ( New York : Charles Scribner 's Sons ) 12 
 = Floriana Lines = 
 The Floriana Lines ( Maltese : Is @-@ Swar tal @-@ <unk> ) are a line of fortifications in Floriana , Malta , which surround the fortifications of Valletta and form the capital city 's outer defences . Construction of the lines began in 1636 and they were named after the military engineer who designed them , Pietro Paolo Floriani . The Floriana Lines were modified throughout the course of the 17th and 18th centuries , and they saw use during the French blockade of 1798 – 1800 . Today , the fortifications are still largely intact but rather dilapidated and in need of restoration . 
 The Floriana Lines are considered to be among the most complicated and elaborate of the Hospitaller fortifications of Malta . Since 1998 , they have been on the tentative list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites , as part of the Knights ' Fortifications around the Harbours of Malta . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background , controversy and construction = = = 
 The city of Valletta was founded on 28 March 1566 by Jean de Valette , the Grand Master of the Order of St. John . The city occupied about half the Sciberras Peninsula , a large promontory separating the Grand Harbour from Marsamxett Harbour , and was protected by <unk> <unk> fortifications , including a land front with four bastions , two cavaliers and a deep ditch . Although these fortifications were well designed , by the early 17th century they were not strong enough to resist a large attack due to new technological developments which increased the range of artillery . 
 In 1634 , there were fears that the Ottomans would attack Malta . Grand Master Antoine de Paule asked Pope Urban VIII for help in improving the island 's fortifications . The Pope sent Pietro Paolo Floriani to examine the defences , who in 1635 proposed building a second line of fortifications around the Valletta Land Front . Some members of the Order and a number of military engineers strongly opposed these plans , since the large garrison needed to man the lines was deemed too expensive . Eventually De Paule decided to construct the lines , since it would have been improper to disagree with the Pope 's military engineer . The Bailiff Gattinara resigned from his post in the Commission of Fortifications in protest . 
 Work on the lines began in 1636 , but no ceremony was carried out to commemorate laying the foundation stone due to controversy surrounding the construction . Since fortification was expensive , the new Grand Master Giovanni Paolo Lascaris imposed a new tax on immovable property . This tax created dispute between the Order and the clergy , who protested to the Pope . Some priests also influenced the population to take part in a national protest , but plans leaked out to authorities and the leaders were arrested . 
 The fortifications were named the Floriana Lines after their architect . By June 1640 , the lines were considered partially defensible , although still incomplete . 
 = = = Improvements and modifications = = = 
 Fears of an Ottoman attack rose again after the fall of Candia in 1669 , and the following year Grand Master Nicolas Cotoner invited the military engineer Antonio Maurizio Valperga to improve the fortifications . At the time the Floriana Lines were still under construction , and a number of weak points had been identified in their original design , especially since the demi @-@ bastions forming the two extremities of the land front were too acute and could not be well defended . Valperga attempted to correct these flaws by making a number of alterations to San Salvatore Bastion on the western end of the lines , and constructing a faussebraye around the entire land front and a crowned hornwork near the eastern end . In the 1680s some minor modifications were made by the Flemish engineer Carlos de Grunenbergh . 
 Work on Valperga 's modifications to the lines progressed slowly , and by the beginning of the 18th century the outworks , glacis and enceinte facing Marsamxett were still unfinished . Works continued under a number of other engineers , including Charles François de Mondion , and the lines were largely complete when Porte des Bombes was constructed in 1721 . Further alterations were made over the following decades , such as the construction of the Northern Entrenchment in the 1730s . 
 In 1724 , the suburb of Floriana was founded in the area between the Floriana Lines and the Valletta Land Front . The suburb was named Borgo Vilhena after Grand Master António Manoel de Vilhena , but it was commonly known as Floriana . It is now a town in its own right . 
 = = = French occupation and British rule = = = 
 French forces invaded Malta in June 1798 , and the Order capitulated after a couple of days . The French occupied the island until September , when the Maltese rebelled and blockaded the French forces in the harbour area with foreign help . The Floriana Lines remained under French control throughout the blockade , and the Maltese built Tas @-@ Samra Battery and a battery on Corradino in order to bombard them . 
 After the British took over Malta in 1800 , the lines remained a functional military establishment . A number of minor alterations were made , including the enlargement of Porte des Bombes , the demolition of a lunette and some other gates , and the addition of gunpowder magazines and traverses . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 The fortifications were included on the Antiquities List of 1925 , and they are now also listed on the National Inventory of the Cultural Property of the Maltese Islands . 
 In the 1970s , parts of the covertway and glacis were destroyed to make way for large storage tanks . Today , the lines are still more or less intact , but some parts are in a rather dilapidated state and in need of restoration . 
 = = Layout = = 
 = = = Land front = = = 
 The Floriana Land Front is the large bastioned enceinte enclosing the landward approach to the Floriana . It consists of the following : 
 Bastion of Provence , also known as San Salvatore Bastion or Sa Maison Bastion – a retrenched demi @-@ bastion which was heavily altered over the course of the 17th and 18th centuries . 
 Notre Dame Curtain – curtain wall linking San Salvatore and St. Philip Bastions . It contained the Notre Dame Gate , which was partially demolished in the 1920s to accommodate for traffic requirements . 
 St. Philip Bastion – a large obtuse @-@ angled bastion at the centre of the land front . It is retrenched with the following bastions : 
 St. James Bastion 
 St. Luke Bastion 
 St. Anne Curtain – curtain wall linking St. Philip and St. Francis Bastions . It contained St. Anne 's Gate , which was replaced by a larger gate in 1859 . The larger gate was also demolished in 1897 to facilitate the flow of traffic . 
 St. Francis Bastion – a large demi @-@ bastion linked to the Polverista Bastion of the Grand Harbour enceinte . It is retrenched with St. Mark Bastion . 
 The land front is surrounded by a ditch , which contains the following outworks : 
 San Salvatore Counterguard – a counterguard near San <unk> Bastion . 
 Pietà Lunette – a pentagonal lunette between San Salvatore Bastion and Notre Dame Ravelin , facing Pietà Creek . It was damaged by aerial bombardment in World War II . 
 Notre Dame Ravelin , also known as the Lower Ravelin – a pentagonal ravelin near Notre Dame Curtain , between San Salvatore and St. Philip Bastions . A number of modern government buildings are located in the open area within the ravelin . 
 a pentagonal lunette between Notre Dame Ravelin and St. Philip Bastion . It was damaged by aerial bombardment in World War II , but the damage was repaired . 
 Porte des Bombes Lunette – a lunette between St. Philip Bastion and St. Francis Ravelin . It was demolished in the early 20th century to make way for the modern road to Valletta . 
 St. Francis Ravelin , also known as the Upper Ravelin – a pentagonal ravelin near St. Anne Curtain , between St. Philip and St. Francis Bastions . The Malta Environment and Planning Authority ( <unk> ) offices are located in the open area within the ravelin . 
 The outworks are surrounded by a faussebraye , advanced ditch , covertway , and glacis . In the 1720s , a gate known as Porta dei <unk> was built in the faussebraye . The gate was enlarged by the British , and became known as Porte des Bombes . It was eventually detached from the faussebraye to facilitate the flow of traffic , and it now looks like a triumphal arch . 
 A crowned hornwork consisting of an inner hornwork with two demi @-@ bastions and an outer crownwork with one full bastion and two demi @-@ bastions is located near St. Francis Ravelin . The crownwork was protected by a musketry gallery overlooking Marsa and by two lunettes , one near the its land front and another near its flank . 
 = = = Marsamxett enceinte = = = 
 The enceinte along the side facing Marsamxett Harbour starts from San Salvatore Bastion of the Floriana Land Front , and originally ended at St. Michael 's Counterguard of the Valletta Land Front . It consists of the following : 
 La Vittoria Bastion – a small casemated bastion grafted onto the Bastion of Provence which forms part of the land front . 
 Polverista Curtain – a long casemated curtain wall between La Vittoria and Msida Bastions . It overlooks the AFM base at Hay Wharf . 
 Msida Bastion – a polygonal asymmetrical bastion with a demi @-@ bastioned retrenchment . A cemetery was built on its upper part in the 19th century . 
 an unnamed curtain wall between Msida and Quarantine Bastions 
 Quarantine Bastion – a polygonal asymmetrical bastion with a demi @-@ bastioned retrenchment . It is breached by a modern road . 
 In addition , a bastioned enceinte known as the North Entrenchment is located behind the entire Marsamxett enceinte , acting as a secondary line of defence . 
 = = = Grand Harbour enceinte = = = 
 The enceinte along the side facing the Grand Harbour starts from St. Francis Bastion of the Floriana Land Front , and ends at St. Peter and St. Paul Counterguard of the Valletta Land Front . It consists of the following : 
 Capuchin Bastion , also known as <unk> , Magazine or Polverista Bastion – a demi @-@ bastion linked to St. Francis Bastion of the land front . It contains an 18th @-@ century gunpowder magazine . 
 a curtain wall linking Capuchin Bastion to the platform near Crucifix Curtain 
 a flat @-@ faced platform or bastion near Crucifix Curtain 
 Crucifix Curtain – curtain wall linking the platform to Crucifix Bastion 
 Crucifix Bastion – a large asymmetrical bastion containing a 19th @-@ century gunpowder magazine . It also had a concrete emplacement for a 9 @-@ inch BL gun , but this has been removed . 
 Kalkara Curtain – curtain wall linking Crucifix and Kalkara Bastions . It is breached by a modern road . 
 Kalkara Bastion – a bastioned enceinte linking to St. Peter & St. Paul Counterguard of the Valletta Land Front . 
 = Adaptive Coloration in Animals = 
 Adaptive Coloration in Animals is a 500 @-@ page textbook about camouflage , warning coloration and mimicry by the Cambridge zoologist Hugh Cott , first published during the Second World War in 1940 ; the book sold widely and made him famous . 
 The book 's general method is to present a wide range of examples from across the animal kingdom of each type of coloration , including marine invertebrates and fishes as well as terrestrial insects , amphibians , reptiles , birds and mammals . The examples are supported by a large number of Cott 's own drawings , diagrams , and photographs . This essentially descriptive natural history treatment is supplemented with accounts of experiments by Cott and others . The book had few precedents , but to some extent follows ( and criticises ) Abbott Handerson Thayer 's 1909 Concealing @-@ Coloration in the Animal Kingdom . 
 The book is divided into three parts : concealment , advertisement , and disguise . Part 1 , concealment , covers the methods of camouflage , which are colour resemblance , countershading , disruptive coloration , and shadow elimination . The effectiveness of these , arguments for and against them , and experimental evidence , are described . Part 2 , advertisement , covers the methods of becoming conspicuous , especially for warning displays in aposematic animals . Examples are chosen from mammals , insects , reptiles and marine animals , and empirical evidence from feeding experiments with toads is presented . Part 3 , disguise , covers methods of mimicry that provide camouflage , as when animals resemble leaves or twigs , and markings and displays that help to deflect attack or to deceive predators with deimatic displays . Both Batesian mimicry and Müllerian mimicry are treated as adaptive resemblance , much like camouflage , while a chapter is devoted to the mimicry and behaviour of the cuckoo . The concluding chapter admits that the book 's force is cumulative , consisting of many small steps of reasoning , and being a wartime book , compares animal to military camouflage . 
 Cott 's textbook was at once well received , being admired both by zoologists and naturalists and among allied soldiers . Many officers carried a copy of the book with them in the field . Since the war it has formed the basis for experimental investigation of camouflage , while its breadth of coverage and accuracy have ensured that it remains frequently cited in scientific papers . 
 = = The book = = 
 = = = Approach = = = 
 Adaptive Coloration in Animals is a 500 @-@ page book , 10 by 7 inches ( 250 by 180 mm ) in its first edition . It was published by Methuen ( in London ) and Oxford University Press ( in New York ) in 1940 . It is full of detailed observations of types of camouflage and other uses of colour in animals , and illustrated by the author with clear drawings and photographs . There is a coloured frontispiece showing eight of Cott 's paintings of tropical amphibians . The book has 48 monotone plates and several illustrations . 
 Cott 's method is to provide a large number of examples , illustrated with his own drawings or photographs , showing animals from different groups including fish , reptiles , birds and insects , especially butterflies . The examples are chosen to illustrate specific adaptations . For example , the fish Chaetodon capistratus is described as follows : 
 this species had the habit of swimming very slowly tail first : but when disturbed it darts rapidly off to safety in the opposite direction ... C. capistratus adopts the same tactics ... [ This fish ] is of particular interest in that the real eye is obliterated and a false eye substituted in one and the same animal . 
 Cott was well aware that he was publishing in wartime . There are , as Julian Huxley remarks in his ' Introduction ' , references throughout the book to the human analogues of animal camouflage and concealment . For example , in the section on ' Adaptive Silence ' , the kestrel is said to " practise dive @-@ bombing attacks " , or " after the fashion of a fighter ' plane " to fly down other birds , while " Owls have solved the problem of the silent air @-@ raid " ; Cott spends the rest of that paragraph on the " method which has recently been rediscovered and put into practice " of shutting off a bomber 's engines and " gliding noiselessly down towards their victims " at Barcelona in the Spanish Civil War . In the concluding chapter , Cott explicitly states " The innumerable visible devices used .. in peace @-@ time and in war @-@ time .. are merely rediscovered .. applications of colour that have already reached a high .. degree of specialization and perfection .. in the animal world " , mentioning predator @-@ prey relationships , sexual selection and signalling to rivals . He then compares the " hunting disguises put on .. as a means of approaching , ambushing or alluring game , and the sniping suits , concealed machine @-@ gun posts , and booby traps " with the camouflage of animal predators ; and similarly he compares " protective disguises " with the " photographer 's hide and the gunner 's observation post . " In the same section , Cott compares intentionally visible signs with animal warning colours : " The policeman 's white gloves have their parallel in the white stripes or spots of nocturnal skunks and <unk> . The Automobile Association has adopted a system of coloration [ black and yellow ] whose copyright belongs by priority to wasps and salamanders . " 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 The book addresses its subject under three main headings : concealment , advertisement , and disguise . 
 = = = = Part I : Concealment = = = = 
 The methods by which concealment is attained in nature 
 Cott sets out his view that we have to be re @-@ taught how to see , mentioning Ruskin 's " innocence of the eye " . He argues that camouflage should , and in animals actually does , use four mechanisms : colour resemblance , obliterative shading ( i.e. countershading , the graded shading which conceals self @-@ shadowing of the lower body ) , disruptive coloration , and shadow elimination . 
 Chapter 1 . General colour resemblance . 
 Cott gives many examples such as a table of 16 species of green tropical tree @-@ snakes . 
 Chapter 2 . Variable colour resemblance . Caterpillars and pupae ( as in Poulton 's famous experiment ) are coloured to match their environment . Mountain hares change colour in winter ; many fish , cephalopods , frogs , and crustacea can change colour rapidly . 
 Chapter 3 . <unk> shading . 
 Following the artist and amateur naturalist Abbott Handerson Thayer , Cott explains countershading with diagrams , photographs of models and examples of real animals . He shows how helpful it would be for military camouflage with drawings of gun barrels . 
 Chapter 4 . Disruptive coloration . 
 Cott argues with diagrams , drawings , photographs and examples that animals are often extremely effectively disruptively patterned . He analyses the component effects of disruption , including " differential blending " and " maximum disruptive contrast " . Cott 's figure 7 is a set of nine drawings , arranged as a 3x3 table . On the left is an animal 's outline in grey tone against a differently coloured background . In the centre , the same animals are now disruptively patterned against the same plain backgrounds . On the right , the disruptively patterned animals are shown against realistic broken backgrounds containing vegetation or rocks . Cott explains 
 The simplified diagrams in Fig . 7 illustrate the value and effectiveness of maximum disruptive contrasts better than any verbal description ... On looking at these drawings from a little distance , it will be seen that the conspicuous patches operate most efficiently in distracting attention from the form of the animals wearing them . By sheer force of their brightness , or blackness , or contrasts , they dominate the picture presented to the eye , apparently destroying their form ... 
 Cott goes on to explain that the right @-@ hand drawing shows the effect " of broken surroundings in further blending and confusing the picture " , observing that this is the closest to what is seen in nature . His readers are invited to look first at the right @-@ hand images to gain an idea of the power of " these optical devices " as camouflage , putting off the moment when the animal is actually recognised . 
 Chapter 5 . <unk> disruptive coloration . 
 Animals such as frogs are patterned so that when they are at rest with legs tucked in , their outline is powerfully disrupted with markings that seem to flow across body and leg boundaries . Eyes too are often hidden in stripes . 
 Chapter 6 . Concealment Of the shadow . 
 Cast shadows give away even well @-@ camouflaged animals . Many animals therefore take care to minimise shadow , by lying down , with flattened bodies , or with fringes . Some hawkmoth caterpillars have false shadow patterns to suggest they are parts of other objects . 
 The function of concealing coloration in nature 
 Chapter 7 . Concealment in defence , mainly as illustrated by birds . 
 Cott considers how effective camouflage is as an adaptation , such as in incubation and rest ( sleep ) in birds . For instance nightjars are nocturnal , and rest , well camouflaged , on the ground during the day . 
 Chapter 8 . Concealment In offence . 
 Cott describes the care that predators take when approaching prey , minimizing visible movement and scent , the use of cover for ambush , and " adaptive silence " . 
 Chapter 9 . Objections and evidence bearing on the theory of concealing coloration . 
 In this chapter Cott discusses various objections to the adaptive ( evolutionary ) nature of camouflage , and provides evidence to dismiss them . Some are " based upon such obvious fallacies that they hardly deserve serious consideration . " 
 Chapter 10 . The effectiveness of concealing coloration . 
 Cott describes simple experiments such as that fish that have changed colour to match a pale background survived better ( 64 % to 42 % ) on such a background than fish which had not . He also quotes some anecdotal observations on wild animals with similar but not quantified results . 
 = = = = Part II : Advertisement = = = = 
 The methods by which conspicuousness is attained in nature 
 Chapter 1 . The appearance and behaviour of aposematic animals . 
 Animals that are genuinely distasteful ( aposematic ) boldly advertise themselves in black , white , red , and yellow . They are often " sluggish " , not running from predators ; gregarious ; and diurnal , since warning displays only work if they can be seen " by potential enemies " . 
 Chapter 2 . Warning displays . 
 Aposematic animals often have ( honest ) threat displays ; edible prey sometimes have ( bluffing ) startle displays . For example the frilled lizard , <unk> kingii , is illustrated in a drawing by Cott , with its tail raised over the body , stretched up on all four legs , mouth wide open , and frills out both sides of the head , making it a startling sight . 
 Chapter 3 . Adventitious warning coloration . 
 Some marine animals select aposematic materials as coverings , not only as camouflage . Some birds nest near wasps ' nests . 
 Warning coloration in relation to prey 
 Chapter 4 . The nature and function of warning coloration , as illustrated by the <unk> . 
 Prey like porcupines have warning colours , make noise , and attack predators ( even leopards ) . 
 Chapter 5 . The Protective Attributes Of Aposematic Animals In General . 
 Evidence is given that conspicuous animals such as caterpillars really are distasteful . Animals with actual poisons are discussed , and how these are secreted , used in bites and stings , or kept to make the animal bitter tasting . 
 Chapter 6 . The relation between warning colours and distasteful attributes . 
 Various kinds of evidence are presented for aposematism . 
 Chapter 7 . The effectiveness of protective attributes associated with warning colours . 
 Experimental evidence is presented that insects with warning colours are rejected by predators . 
 Warning coloration in reference to predatory enemies 
 Chapter 8 . Experimental evidence that vertebrate enemies learn by experience . 
 Experiments by Cott show that toads learn to avoid eating stinging bees . 
 Chapter 9 . Evidence of selective feeding by vertebrate enemies in a state of nature . 
 Evidence from wild birds and toads demonstrates preferences for particular prey . 
 = = = = Part III : Disguise = = = = 
 Special protective and aggressive resemblance 
 Chapter 1 . Special resemblance to particular objects . 
 Cott describes leaf @-@ like fish , chameleons , and insects , and other mimetic forms of camouflage . A liana @-@ like snake near Para ( a haunt of Henry Walter Bates in Naturalist on the River Amazons ) 160 times as long as it was thick is called " a revelation in the art of aggressive resemblance " . 
 Chapter 2 . Adaptive behaviour in relation to special cryptic resemblance . 
 Animals keep still , sway in the wind , or play dead to assist their camouflage . Poulton 's examples of twig @-@ like Geometridae caterpillars are praised . There are fine photographs of leaf insects , and Cott 's admired drawing of a poor @-@ me @-@ one or potoo , <unk> griseus , sitting on its nest mimicking a broken branch . Cott explains , in a section on " Special resemblances in relation to the attitude of rest " 
 This wonderful bird ... habitually selects the top of an upright stump as a receptacle for its egg , which usually occupies a small hollow just , and only just , large enough to contain it . ... the stump selected had thrown up a new leader just below the point of fracture ; ... the bird sat facing this in such a way that when viewed from behind they came into line and blended with the grey stem . 
 Chapter 3 . Adventitious Concealing Coloration . 
 Cott begins by citing Shakespeare 's Macbeth with " until / Great <unk> to the Dunsinane hill / Shall come against him " to introduce his chapter on the use of materials as camouflage . Animals from crabs to caterpillars are described . 
 Conspicuous localized characters 
 Chapter 4 . <unk> marks . 
 Cott describes markings that help to deflect attack , such as the eyespots of butterfly wings and the twitching cast @-@ off tails of lizards , both acknowledged to Poulton , as well as the distraction displays of birds such as the partridge mentioned by Gilbert White in his Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne . 
 Chapter 5 . Directive marks . 
 A selection of lures and deceptive markings are described . A large drawing depicts the deimatic warning display of a mantis , <unk> <unk> with its spined forelegs raised and large spiral eyespots on its spread wings forming an image " suggestive of a formidable foe " . Other drawings depict the eyespots of fish such as Chaetodon capistratus , the four @-@ eye butterfly fish , which are " usually towards the tail end " and tending to direct attack away from the head . 
 Alluring and mimetic resemblances 
 Chapter 6 . Alluring coloration . 
 The bird @-@ dropping spider <unk> decipiens , the flower mantis <unk> bicornis and other camouflaged hunters are described . 
 Chapter 7 . Mimicry : the attributes of mimics . 
 Cott follows Poulton in treating mimicry as basically the same as camouflage or " adaptive resemblance " . Batesian mimicry and Mullerian mimicry are compared . The behaviour of " <unk> seal @-@ hunters " and First World War Q @-@ ships are mentioned . 
 Chapter 8 . Breeding parasitism and mimicry in cuckoos . 
 The mimicry and behaviour of the European cuckoo , Cuculus canorus is analysed . 
 = = = = Conclusion = = = = 
 The final chapter confirms that " The force of the facts and arguments used in this work is cumulative in effect . " Many small steps of reasoning combine to show that " adaptive coloration ... has been ... one of the main achievements of organic evolution . " The book ends by comparing human artefacts and " natural adaptations " , both of which can have goals ( recall the publication date of 1940 , early in the Second World War ) including " the frustration of a predatory animal or of an aggressive Power " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Foreword = = = 
 Julian S. Huxley wrote a foreword ( labelled ' Introduction ' ) which defends the Darwinian concept of adaptation , especially of colour ( in animals ) and within that frame of mimicry . He makes it clear that " in these last thirty years " ( that is , from about 1910 to 1940 ) he believed that " experimental biologists " professed , even if they did not actually hold , " a radical scepticism on the subject of adaptations " , in other words about whether natural selection really could have created the enormous diversity of pattern and colour seen in nature . Huxley quoted the now long @-@ forgotten Aaron Franklin Shull 's 1936 Evolution which stated " These special forms [ sexual selection , warning colours , mimicry and signalling ] of the selection idea ... seem destined to be dropped , or at least relegated to very minor places in the Evolution discussion . " , and more sharply that " aggressive and alluring resemblance " ( Huxley 's words ) " must probably be set down as products of fancy belonging to uncritical times . " Huxley 's reply is simply 
 Dr. Cott , in this important book , has turned the tables with a vengeance on objectors of this type ... Had they taken the trouble to acquaint themselves with even a fraction of the relevant facts to be found in nature , they could never have ventured to enunciate such sweeping criticisms : their objections are a measure of their ignorance . 
 With objections dismissed , Huxley remarks that " Dr. Cott is a true follower of Darwin in driving his conclusions home by sheer weight of example , " observing that " Faced with his long lists of demonstrative cases , the reader is tempted to wonder why adaptive theories of coloration have been singled out for attack by anti @-@ <unk> . " Huxley also noted Cott 's " constant cross @-@ reference to human affairs " , and that it was good to know that Cott was applying his principles " to the practice of camouflage in war " . 
 Huxley concluded his introduction by describing Adaptive Coloration as " in many respects the last word on the subject " , upholding the great tradition of " scientific natural history " . 
 = = = Contemporary reviews ( circa 1940 ) = = = 
 Reviewers had little to compare Adaptive Coloration with . The English zoologist Edward Bagnall Poulton , a Darwinian , had written a 360 @-@ page book , The Colours of Animals , fifty years earlier in 1890 , and he was able , at age 84 , to review Cott 's work in Nature on its appearance in 1940 , beginning with the words 
 This excellent work , eagerly awaited for many years , will be most welcome to naturalists , even , we may hope , to the few who have hitherto rejected the Darwinian interpretation which the author has here supported by a mass of additional evidence based on his own observations and those of very many others . 
 The ichthyologist Carl Leavitt Hubbs , reviewing the book for American Naturalist in 1942 , began 
 In this <unk> epic Dr. Cott stamps himself as a true disciple of the master evolutionist . Indeed , he rivals Darwin in the thorough , objective and penetrating analysis of a major biological problem . An immense body of facts and interpretation , much of it original , has been judiciously considered and brought to bear on the question of the biological significance of coloration . 
 Hubbs notes that Cott is seeming concerned about the scarcity of experimental data for the survival value of camouflage , and accordingly relies on Sumner and <unk> 's " clear @-@ cut results " , but at once continues that Cott relies on " the general lore of natural history " . Hubbs also remarks on the " resurgence to Darwinian views " , referring to the scepticism about the power of natural selection among both geneticists of the time and to the <unk> views of Trofim Lysenko . 
 Hubbs observes that Cott is both an artist and a naturalist as well as a scientist : " In section after section , rivaling one another in fascination , this master of art and of natural history unfolds the biological significance of adaptive coloration in animals . " And Cott 's emphasis on disruptive patterning and ( following Thayer ) countershading clearly affected the reviewer : " Particularly impressive is the author 's treatment of " coincident disruptive coloration " , in which a ruptive mark crosses structural boundaries , so as to obliterate visually such ordinarily conspicuous parts as the eye and the limbs . Concealment of an animal 's ordinarily telltale shadow is also stressed " . Hubbs 's review ends " This book is the work of an artist , and it is a work of art . Every biologist with an interest in any phase of natural history or evolution should keep it at hand . " 
 " <unk> " , reviewing Cott in The Geographical Journal in 1940 , begins with " In this large and well @-@ illustrated volume the author discusses at length reason or reasons for the various colour patterns found in the animal kingdom . " The reviewer goes on " He has presented us with a vast number of facts and observations which are somewhat difficult to analyse . " However " <unk> " admits that disruptive coloration " is discussed at considerable length by Mr. Cott and many remarkable instances of it are considered in detail " . The review ends by mentioning that while biologists ( of the 1930s ) usually " reject the influence of Natural Selection in evolution , the facts of adaptive coloration as given in Mr. Cott 's work are a strong argument in its favour , and must be given due weight . This is what Mr. Cott claims to have accomplished in a volume which will certainly take its place as a most valuable contribution to zoological literature . " 
 = = = Looking back ( after 2000 ) = = = 
 Peter Forbes , in his book Dazzled and Deceived , wrote that 
 Cott 's Adaptive Coloration in Animals must be the only compendious zoology tract ever to be packed in a soldier 's <unk> . The book also marks the apotheosis of the descriptive natural history phase of mimicry studies . Although Cott does report experiments on predation to test the efficacy of mimicry and camouflage , the book is essentially a narrative of examples plus theory . 
 Over 60 years after its publication , Adaptive Coloration in Animals remains a core reference on the subject . <unk> <unk> and colleagues observe in a 2001 paper that 
 Adaptive coloration in animals has been a very active research field in evolutionary biology over the years ( e.g. Poulton 1890 , Cott 1940 , <unk> 1973 , <unk> @-@ <unk> 1988 , Malcolm 1990 ) , and one in which the Lepidoptera have always featured prominently as model species . 
 As a natural history narrative on what has become an intensely researched experimental subject , Adaptive Coloration could be thought obsolete , but instead , Peter Forbes observes " But Cott 's book is still valuable today for its enormous range , for its passionate exposition of the theories of mimicry and camouflage " . This width of coverage and continuing relevance can be seen in the introduction to Sami <unk> and Johan Lind 's 2005 paper on camouflage , Background @-@ Matching and Disruptive Coloration , and the Evolution of Cryptic Coloration , which cites Adaptive Coloration no fewer than eight times , quoting his terms " cryptic coloration or camouflage " , " concealing coloration " , " background matching ( also called cryptic resemblance ) " , " disruptive coloration " , resemblance to visual background , and the difficulty a predator has to detect a prey visually . 
 Steven Vogel , in a review of Peter Forbes 's book Dazzled and Deceived ( 2009 ) , echoes Julian Huxley 's words of seventy years before ( in his ' Introduction ' ) by writing 
 The zoologist Hugh Cott had the final word in Adaptive Coloration in Animals ( 1940 ) , a definitive synthesis of everything known about camouflage and mimicry in nature . Cott ruffled fewer feathers [ than Trofim Lysenko or Vladimir Nabokov ] , and his well @-@ organized and <unk> ideas proved militarily effective , even under the scrutiny of improved techniques for target detection . Thayer ’ s principles reemerged in more temperate and rational terms , and camouflage schemes based on them survived both photometric analyses and enemy encounters . Biomimetic camouflage took its place as yet another technique in a sophisticated <unk> of visual deceptions . 
 Camouflage researcher Roy Behrens cites and discusses Adaptive Coloration frequently in his writings . For example , in his <unk> blog , related to the book of the same name , he writes of Cott 's drawings of the hind limbs of the Common frog : " Reproduced above is one of my favorite drawings from what is one of my favorite books . " He continues " What makes these drawings ( and the book itself ) even more interesting is that Cott ( 1900 @-@ 1987 ) was not just a zoologist — he was a highly skilled scientific illustrator ( these are his own pen @-@ and @-@ ink drawings ) , a wildlife photographer , and a prominent British <unk> in World War II . " Still in 2011 , Behrens can write of Cott 's way of thinking , citing his words as models of clear and accurate explanation of the mechanisms of camouflage : " As he so aptly explained it , disruptive patterns work ' by the optical destruction of what is present ' , while continuous patterns work ' by the optical construction of what is not present . ' " 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Adaptive Coloration in Animals has been published as follows : 
 1940 , Methuen , Frome and London ( printed by Butler and Tanner ) . Foreword by Julian Huxley 
 1940 , Oxford University Press , New York 
 1941 , Oxford University Press , New York 
 1957 , Methuen , London ( reprinted with minor corrections ) 
 1966 , Methuen , London ( reprinted with minor corrections ) 
 = = = Primary = = = 
 This list identifies where in Cott 's book the quotations come from . 
 = = = Secondary = = = 
 = Simpson Tide = 
 " Simpson Tide " is the nineteenth episode of The Simpsons ' ninth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 29 , 1998 . After being fired from the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant , Homer decides to join the United States Navy Reserve . The episode was the second and last to be written by Joshua Sternin and Jeffrey Ventimilia and was the final episode directed by Milton Gray . 
 It guest starred Rod Steiger as Captain <unk> and Bob Denver as himself , with one @-@ time The Simpsons writer Michael Carrington making an appearance as the Drill Sergeant . This was the last episode Al Jean and Mike Reiss executive produced together , although Jean became show runner again in season 13 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While lying on the couch at home , Homer sees a recruitment advertisement on television for the Naval Reserve and decides to enlist . Moe , Barney , and Apu decide to join him . Meanwhile , Bart purchases an earring , which an outraged Homer confiscates . 
 Homer and the others are placed on a nuclear submarine . When the captain goes to check on a problem in the torpedo hatch , Homer is left in charge . An enemy submarine approaches , and Homer gives the order to fire a torpedo . However , the captain is in the torpedo tube and is fired at the other submarine . The other sub fires back at them and Homer gives the order to retreat . The submarine ends up in Russian waters and is seen by the United States government as an attempt to defect . This event creates a political schism between the USA and Russia , leading to the revelation that the Soviet Union in fact never truly dissolved . Nuclear war is anticipated until the US Navy drops depth charges on Homer 's sub , aiming either to destroy it or force it to surface . The consequent explosion causes a pinhole leak in the submarine 's wall . Homer uses Bart 's earring to plug the leak and saves the submarine . 
 The vessel surfaces and Homer is taken to be court @-@ martialed . Homer 's punishment ends up being a mild dishonorable discharge . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Simpson Tide " was one of two season nine episodes that was executive produced by Al Jean and Mike Reiss , who together were the showrunners for the third and fourth seasons . Although Jean would later return to run the show the following season , it was the last episode that Reiss received an executive producer credit for . Joshua Sternin and Jeffrey Ventimilia , the episode writers , were working on Jean and Reiss 's show The Critic at the time , and pitched an episode where Homer joins the Naval Reserve . Although the episode is partly based on the film Crimson Tide , the original episode pitch was made before the film was released . After the release of the film , the writers decided to start incorporating things from the movie in the script . In the original draft , Bart sneaked on board the submarine with Homer . They were trying to do it " for the comedy of it " , but could not get the draft to work , so it was cut . It was difficult for them to figure out how to get the captain off of the sub and they eventually decided to have him shot out of the torpedo tube , which in the DVD commentary , Al Jean says that Steiger claimed that he really did get stuck in a torpedo tube once . 
 The Navy drill instructor , along with the announcer to " Exploitation Theater " , was voiced by Michael Carrington , who had written the season four episode " Homer 's Triple Bypass " and previously voiced Sideshow Raheem . Bob Denver voices himself in the episode and was directed by Mike Reiss . Rod Steiger guest stars as the captain and was directed by Al Jean . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Many parts of the episode , including the title , refer to the 1995 film Crimson Tide . The captain of the submarine is based on Captain Frank Ramsey , a character in the film who was portrayed by Gene Hackman . The opening couch gag is a recreation of the Rocky and Bullwinkle animated bumper seen at the end of each Bullwinkle short . The music accompanying it is also adapted from the original music in the bumper . Homer mentions that he and his friends joining the Navy is similar to The Deer Hunter , and the Russian roulette scene from the film is later parodied . Right before the submarine submerges , the song " In the Navy " is played and the Village People can be seen dancing . Homer dreams of being on " the planet of the doughnuts " , which is reminiscent of the film Planet of the Apes . When aboard the submarine , Homer refers to one of the crew members as Mr. Sulu , a reference to the character in Star Trek : The Original Series . Bart sings a portion of the song " Do the Bartman " and Ralph Wiggum comments that it " is so 1991 " , which was when the song was released . Grampa Simpson claims that he attacked John F. Kennedy on the PT @-@ 109 when Kennedy stated " Ich bin ein Berliner " , leading to Grampa mistaking him for a Nazi . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Simpson Tide " finished 29th in ratings for the week of March 23 – 29 , 1998 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 2 , equivalent to approximately 9 @.@ 0 million viewing households . It was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files . 
 Michael Schiffer , one of the writers of the film Crimson Tide , is said to have enjoyed this episode . Mike Reiss considers the sequence where Russia returns to being the Soviet Union to be " the nuttiest the show has ever been " . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it " a fairly straightforward episode where the biggest laugh comes from Homer being able to talk to penguins and Bart trying to impress his classmates by doing The Bartman . " 
 = Concentrate and Ask Again = 
 " Concentrate and Ask Again " is the 12th episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 55th episode overall . In the episode , the Fringe division enlists the help of a troubled telepathic man ( Omid Abtahi ) in their investigation of a mysterious blue killing powder . Abtahi , Kevin Corrigan , Jody Thompson , and Paul Jarrett guest starred . 
 Graham Roland and Matthew Pitts co @-@ wrote the episode , while Dennis Smith directed . The episode first aired in the United States on February 4 , 2011 to an estimated 4 @.@ 3 million viewers on its initial broadcast , a 16 percent drop in viewership from the previous two Friday episodes , " Reciprocity " and " The Firefly " . " Concentrate and Ask Again " received mixed to positive reviews from television critics , with writers praising the advancement of the series ' mythology but criticizing the main mystery plot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A lead scientist for a pharmaceutical company is killed by a blue powder that turns his bones into dust . The Fringe division traces the source of the package which contained the powder to a former Marine ; when they search his home , Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) finds the man nearby and gives chase , but the man is hit by a car and knocked into a coma . Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) fears that there may be others involved in targeted attacks . Walter ( John Noble ) suggests they read the man 's mind to learn of any such plot using the ability of one of his undocumented nootropic Cortexiphan patients , Simon Phillips , ( Omid Abtahi ) . Simon , who is unable to control his telepathic abilities , has isolated himself from the general population for two decades , but finds some comfort in not being able to read the mind of Olivia ( Anna Torv ) — a fellow Cortexiphan patient . Olivia convinces Simon to help them with the ongoing investigation despite the mental anguish he will suffer in a large crowded city such as Boston . During their time together , Olivia explains her concerns over Peter , wondering if he still feels any attraction to her alternate self , Fauxlivia , in the parallel universe . Meanwhile , three military contractors are killed by the release of the compound in an elevator , confirming Broyles ' fears . 
 With Simon 's ability and Nina Sharp 's ( Blair Brown ) help , the team learn of a " Project Jellyfish " , a secret military bioweapon project that the comatose man and two others were involved in , aimed at developing a chemical agent that destroys skeletons . Though they were given inoculations to negate the effects of the chemical agent , their exposure was passed to their stillborn children who had developed without skeletons . Realizing that the men are seeking revenge on those involved with Project Jellyfish , the Fringe team determines the identity of the last intended victim , a former military general running for public office . With Simon 's help , Olivia is able to neutralize the two targets before they release the powder at a dinner gala for the general . As Olivia returns Simon to his home , he hands her an envelope that contains what he had read of Peter 's thoughts . 
 In side plots , Nina has recovered different translations of the tomes about the First People , including one from William Bell 's personal safe , and realizes that they all say the same thing in different languages . She identifies the name of the author of each book as an anagram of the name " Sam Weiss " , the bowling alley owner who she had directed Olivia to after her initial return from the parallel universe . She approaches Sam , who does not deny he wrote the books , and who explains that the doomsday device being constructed can either create or destroy a universe ; how that will work will depend on Peter , who is biologically tuned to the device . Sam posits that Peter will most likely save the universe from which the Olivia he loves originates . The episode ends with Olivia reading the note from Simon , which states that Peter still has feelings for Fauxlivia . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Concentrate and Ask Again " was written by co @-@ producer Graham Roland and story editor Matthew Pitts , a former assistant of series co @-@ creator J.J. Abrams . The last episode Roland co @-@ wrote was the season three episode " The Abducted " , while Pitts ' last writing credit was the season three episode " Do Shapeshifters Dream of Electric Sheep ? " . Dennis Smith directed the episode , his first Fringe credit since the season two episode " August " . 
 " Concentrate and Ask Again " featured guest star Omid Abtahi as telepathic Simon Phillips , his only credit for the series . Guest actor Kevin Corrigan returned as recurring character Sam Weiss . The episode featured guest stars Jody Thompson and Paul Jarrett as the new characters Sara Downey and Warren Blake , respectively . Thompson called the part " the kind of role that actors dream of " . She described the episode , " The material was so compelling and perfectly written it was a matter of not getting in the way of what the creators had created . I ’ m anxious about how it will come off . Truthfully , I ’ ve been torturing myself , wondering if I have somehow ruined the beauty of what I read in the script " . 
 As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " Concentrate and Ask Again " , with the intention of having " students learn about bones and the nature of their chemical and physical composition . " 
