 = = = Other executions = = = 
 An unknown 19 @-@ year @-@ old boy was hanged on February 17 , 1864 , in Virginia City for shooting an unarmed man in a tavern . 
 Chris Lowrie , Doc Howard , and Jem Romaine were convicted of the Magruder murders by a Idaho Territorial court in Lewiston and hanged on March 4 , 1864 , based on the testimony of William Page . Page was not executed . 
 On March 10 , 1864 , vigilantes hanged J.A. Slade in Virginia City for serious drunken behavior , breaches of the peace and reckless gun play that endangered the communities ' citizens . 
 James Brady was hanged by vigilantes in Nevada City on June 15 , 1864 , for shooting another man . 
 Jem Kelly was apprehended near present day Jackson , Idaho Territory on the Snake River by Montana vigilantes for a series of petty thefts in Alder Gulch . He was hanged on September 5 , 1864 , along the Snake River in Idaho Territory . 
 On September 17 , 1864 , vigilantes hanged John " The Hat " Dolan in Virginia City for stealing $ 700 from a roommate . 
 On October 31 , 1864 , vigilantes captured and hanged J.C. <unk> in Bannack for his alleged spying on behalf of the road agent gang in 1863 . This was the last execution performed by the Vigilance Committee of Alder Gulch . 
 = = = <unk> and escapes = = = 
 Another tactic employed by the vigilantes was banishment from the territory . It is unknown how many men were given the warning to leave the territory or suffer execution for their misdeeds . Alexander <unk> , a merchant in Bannack at the time believed the number of banishments was high but wrote this in his autobiography : Reminiscences of Alexander <unk> ( 1923 ) : 
 I don 't think they [ the vigilantes ] made any mistake in hanging anybody . The only mistake they made was about fifty percent of those whom they merely banished should have been hung instead , as quite a number of these men were finally hung . 
 Some of the road agents in Plummer 's gang or on Yeager 's list were able to escape vigilante justice by fleeing the territory . Notable among these men were Augustus " Gad " Moore , Billy Terwilliger , William Mitchell , Harvey Meade , " Rattlesnake Dick " , " Cherokee Bob " , Tex Caldwell , Jeff Perkins , Samuel Bunton , " Irwin of the Big Hole " , William Moore and Charles Reeves . 
 = = = Establishment of Territorial Law = = = 
 During the summer of 1864 , Hezekiah L. Hosmer , a lawyer from Ohio , was working for the U.S. House of Representative Committee on Territories . After working on the formation of Montana Territory for the committee , he was formally appointed as the first Chief Justice of Montana Territory . He arrived in Montana in October 1864 . Prior to the first session of the Territorial Legislature which convened on December 12 , 1864 , in Bannack , Hosmer announced that he was adopting Common Law as the primary criminal and civil law and Idaho 's Territorial Law as a basis for criminal and civil procedure . On December 5 , 1864 , Hosmer boldly convened a public Grand Jury session in Virginia City and announced that the vigilantes had served their purpose and from this day forward , unilateral actions by the vigilantes would be considered criminal acts . 
 = = Helena vigilantism , 1865 – 1870 = = 
 On July 14 , 1864 , four prospectors — John S. Cowan , John Crab , Bob Staley and Daniel Jackson — found gold in a small creek they named " Last Chance Gulch " . As word of the strike spread throughout the area , prospectors and fortune seekers , including many from Alder Gulch and Bannack , migrated to Last Chance Gulch and the town of Helena , Montana was founded . By the middle of 1865 , many prominent vigilantes of Alder Gulch , including Wilbur Sanders , John X. Biedler , and Anton Holter , had moved to Helena . When the territory was formed , three judicial districts were established . The First District belonged to Judge Hosmer and included the towns of Bannack , Virginia City , Nevada City and Deer Lodge . The Third District encompassed the towns around Helena . From July 1864 , until August 1865 , the only justice system was the miners ' court ; the Third District did not get its first chief judge until August 1865 , when Judge Lyman Munson arrived from the east . 
 On June 8 , 1865 , John Keene and Harry Slater , two men who had an unresolved quarrel from their days in Salt Lake City , spotted each other in Sam Greer 's saloon on Helena 's Bridge Street . Keene shot Slater in the head , killing him instantly . Keene surrendered himself to Helena sheriff George Wood and freely admitted his guilt in the shooting . A two @-@ day trial ensued where some members of the jury were known vigilantes from Alder Gulch . Since there was no official trial judge , Stephan Reynolds , a respected member of the Helena community , presided . At the end of the trial , the jury returned a unanimous guilty verdict and Keene was hanged from the lone pine tree just outside town . The large tree , one of few that remained in proximity to Helena because most had been cut down for lumber , became known as the " Old Hangman 's Tree " . Although Keene 's trial and execution was not considered vigilantism , the Helena community , similar to the Alder Gulch community in 1863 , felt the need to establish a more reliable means of law and order . 
 = = = Committee of Safety = = = 
 Vigilante justice in Helena followed a pattern similar to that of Alder Gulch . Immediately after Keene 's hanging , leading members of the Helena community established the Helena Committee of Safety , akin to the Vigilance Committee of Alder Gulch . Although no records of the committee 's membership or bylaws exist , Nathaniel Langford , who had been asked to lead the organization but declined ( he did serve on its Executive Committee ) , reflected in his book Vigilante Days and Ways , that crimes of horse stealing , murder , and highway robbery would be punishable by death . 
 In July 1865 , the Helena vigilantes captured Jack <unk> in Diamond City , Montana and charged him with various crimes of robbery . Prior to his execution by hanging from Helena 's " Hangman 's Tree " , <unk> confessed to being a member of the Virginia City road agents and to at least a dozen murders in the territory . 
 Shortly after Judge Lyman Munson 's arrival in Helena , he convened a Grand Jury on August 12 , 1865 . However , unlike Judge Hosmer in Alder Gulch , Munson made no remarks about vigilantism nor did he threaten vigilantes with prosecution if they continued their activities . The vigilantes showed little respect for Munson 's court and proceeded to carry out at least 14 executions in the next eight months . No member of Helena 's vigilantes was ever indicted by Munson 's grand jury for executions carried out by the Helena Committee of Safety . The last execution by the Helena vigilantes occurred on April 27 , 1870 when Joseph Wilson and Arthur Compton were hanged from the " Old Hangman 's Tree " for the robbery and attempted murder of George Leonard . The double hanging is significant because it was photographed at the time and the image , widely circulated , had the effect of seriously dampening public sentiment for vigilantism . 
 = = Pax <unk> = = 
 By the 1870s Montana as a whole was experiencing what Montana historian Frederic Allen described as a " sort of pax <unk> " Allen claims this was due to the reputation for summary executions but also linked to the discovery of gold in the Black Hills of the Dakota Territory . This drew many of the prospectors and camp followers out of Montana , reducing the sector of the population more closely associated with crime . 
 = = <unk> 's associations = = 
 By the 1870s , cattle ranching and related livestock raising was a large and prosperous business in Montana . Cattle and horses were valuable commodities and always subject to rustling by thieves . After 1879 , with the threat from the Indian wars diminished on the plains of Montana , stock ranches and open range cattle ranching moved east into Central and Eastern Montana . The DHS ranch , owned by Samuel Hauser , Andrew Davis and Granville Stuart was established in 1879 in the Musselshell region of Central Montana and became one of the largest open range ranches in Montana . 
 The first stockmen 's association in Montana was formed in Virginia City in 1873 . The association was established to discuss branding standards , how to deal with rustling and how to influence the territorial legislature to pass laws favorable to the cattle industry . This association did not survive , but led to the creation of other organizations in subsequent years . In 1878 , the Montana Stock Association of Lewis and Clark County was organized . One of its prominent members , Ross Deegan , editorialized about the need for extralegal action if the territorial legislature did not enact laws to protect the cattle industry : 
 Will [ our legislators ] give us ... protection , or shall we be compelled against our wishes to become judges and executors of what we deem a proper penalty for the commission of such infringement upon the rights of property ? 
 In July , 1879 , a Territorial Stock Association was formed that ultimately spawned a number of small county or district based associations throughout Montana . By 1883 , the value of cattle in Montana was estimated at greater than $ 25 million and annual losses from rustling exceeded three percent . By the summer of 1884 , cattle men resorted to <unk> to deal with rustlers and the first recorded hanging occurred at Fort Maginnis on July 3 , 1884 , when Reese Anderson , a DHS ranch foreman , and several other ranch hands hanged Sam McKenzie for horse thievery . 
 = = = Stuart 's Stranglers = = = 
 The hanging of Sam McKenzie and other citizen justice in early July 1884 prompted many thieves and rustlers to leave the territory . However , a large band of horse thieves still operated in the Musselshell region . With the tacit approval of the <unk> 's associations , Granville Stuart organized a small intelligence network and mobilized forces to go after the thieves . The group included many of Stuart 's ranch hands and stock detectives employed by various stock associations . Known as " Stuart 's Stranglers " , the vigilantes were responsible for the recovery of dozens of stolen horses and the deaths of at least 18 thieves in July 1884 , by hanging , shootings or fire . The last hanging occurred on August 1 , 1884 . In July 1884 , Theodore Roosevelt who later became the 26th President of the United States , was operating a cattle ranch in Medora , North Dakota along the Little Missouri River in cooperation with cattle merchant Marquis de Mores . His ranch was suffering from rustling as well . Both Mores and Roosevelt offered their services to the Stranglers , but Stuart declined the offer to avoid the undue notoriety they would bring . From that point forward , stock detectives , employed by the various stock associations , took responsibility for enforcing stock laws and deterring rustling . Although there was minor public outrage about the killings , none of Stuart 's Stranglers were ever brought to trial for their actions and editorials in regional newspapers praised their efforts . General acclamation of Granville Stuart 's actions was reflected by his election as the first president of the Montana <unk> 's Association in late July 1884 . 
 = = 3 @-@ 7 @-@ 77 = = 
 The numerical symbol 3 @-@ 7 @-@ 77 has long been associated with Montana vigilantes . Its meaning is unclear though many theories have been put forward trying to explain what it symbolized , none conclusive , including references to the dimensions of a grave , the amount of time a miscreant had to leave town , assorted Masonic symbolism , details of membership structure , and a simple copying of the symbol from organizations in Colorado and California . Although it has been associated with vigilantes in Alder Gulch , this is not supported by historical evidence . The first documented evidence of use of the symbol in a vigilante scenario occurred in November 1879 in Helena when it was mentioned in a newspaper article . A 1914 dissertation noted that it was simply used as part of a meeting notice . It was incorporated into the uniform patch of the Montana Highway Patrol ( <unk> ) in 1956 . <unk> administrator Alex Stephenson designed the insignia and explained , " we chose the symbol to keep alive the memory of this first people 's police force . " 
 = = Historiography = = 
 The first written account of the vigilantes was Thomas Dimsdale 's Vigilantes of Montana which first appeared as a series of articles in 1865 editions of the Montana Post , Virginia City 's and Montana 's first newspaper . Dimsdale was a member of the Alder Gulch Vigilance Committee and editor of the Montana Post . His early accounts of the Alder Gulch vigilante events are widely cited and the book version of his articles , the first book published in Montana Territory in 1866 , has been extensively reprinted since its first edition . 
 The value of Dimsdale 's work lies in the fact that the volume at first a series of articles for his own paper , The Montana Post is exactly what it purports to be . Truth than fiction is ever stranger , and no glorified romance of the old west has ever succeeded in echoing like authenticity . What we have in The Vigilantes is the statement of fact before it becomes fiction , the unadorned moment in history before hearsay , the folk imagination , and the teller of tales weaves it into saga . 
 X. Biedler , one of the Alder Gulch and Helena vigilante enforcers wrote about his vigilante activities in his personal journals . They weren 't available until well after his death when Helen F. Sanders , the daughter @-@ in @-@ law of Wilbur Sanders finally got them published in 1957 . Nathaniel Langford , also a member of the vigilantes , explorer of the upper Yellowstone ( 1870 ) , first superintendent of Yellowstone National Park ( 1872 – 1877 ) , territorial tax collector ( 1864 – 1869 ) and author published Vigilante Days and Ways @-@ Pioneers of the Rockies in 1893 after he returned to his home in Minnesota . In a 1912 speech to the Montana Historical Society , western historian , Olin Wheeler provided positive commentary on the Alder Gulch vigilantes in a tribute to the life of Nathaniel Langford . 
 ... Under the domination of the Vigilantes the desperadoes were hung or banished , crime was actually and swiftly punished , life and property were rendered safe , and society was rescued from a state of anarchy . Some of the best citizens in the territory were Vigilantes . ... Mr. Langford himself , happily , in the Introduction to his Vigilante Days and Ways and a most valuable chronicle of the time of which it treats , has presented a statement of facts and of arguments justifying the Vigilante methods , that is impartial , honest , cogent , forceful , and convincing to an open and discriminating mind . Honor and praise , instead of adverse criticism , are due those men , and no apologies are necessary for what they did and dared . 
 Another account , not published until 1982 , is that of former Montana Supreme Court Justice ( 1922 – 1935 ) Lew L. Callaway . Edited by his son Lew Callaway Jr . , Montana 's Righteous Hangmen : The Vigilantes in Action stems from Callaway 's association with vigilante Captain James William in the late 1800s . Lew Callaway wrote extensively about the vigilantes and his stories which add more intimate details about how the vigilantes operated are captured in this volume . Although some vigilante activities during this period were criticized by citizens and civic leaders , there was a general affirmation of their purpose and contribution to law and order in a growing territory . Mark C. Dillon 's Montana Vigilantes 1863 – 1870 Gold , Guns and Gallows ( 2013 ) concludes that given the lawless environment and criminal activity in Alder Gulch and Helena at the time , the lack of any functioning justice system and the understanding of due process at the time , the vigilantes acted in a way they thought was best for their communities . He contends that judging the vigilantes by today 's understanding and standards of due process is problematic . 
 Justice Dillon 's book is the first work of its kind that examines western vigilante history through the prism of substantive , procedural , and constitutional law , and the role that lawyers and judges ultimately played in restoring a credible system of criminal justice to the region by the end of the decade . ... Universities only publish books that survive rigorous peer reviews . Historian Paul R. Wylie , who was among the historians that reviewed Dillon 's manuscript , predicts that the book " will be the best work on the Montana Vigilantes , and will likely be around for years to come . " Wylie describes the book as having a " careful , informative , judicial approach [ that is ] well @-@ written and very readable , " and that to his knowledge , " there has never been a work in the area quite like this . " 
 In 2004 , Frederick Allen , a journalist and historian , published A Decent and Orderly Lynching : The Montana Vigilantes reviewed as an up @-@ to @-@ day balanced account of Montana 's vigilante history ( 1864 – 1870 ) . Allen 's book reinforces the motivations and methods of the earliest vigilantes in Alder Gulch while commenting on the growing disdain for vigilantism in the late 1860s . More generalist works on Montana history such as Merrill G. Burlingame 's The Montana Frontier ( 1942 ) and Michael P. Malone 's Montana @-@ A History of Two Centuries ( 1991 ) adequately summarize the vigilante period largely based on earlier accounts by Dimsdale , Langford and Biedler . Additionally , many topical histories of Montana , such as novelist and Montana historian Dan Cushman 's Montana : The Gold Frontier ( 1973 ) cover the vigilante period . 
 Some works published in the late 20th century about vigilante activity in Alder Gulch portray the vigilantes and their leaders as conspirators with political motives rather than restoring law and order , making an argument that victims were not afforded due process prior to their execution and evidence was insufficient to prove their guilt or innocence . Two works , of Ruth E. Mather and F. E. Boswell , Hanging the Sheriff @-@ A Biography of Henry Plummer ( 1987 , 1999 ) and Vigilante Victims : Montana 's 1864 Hanging Spree ( 1991 ) have been criticized as revisionist , and received poor reviews by Montana historians such as Michael P. Malone and Richard B. Roeder . Additional criticism came from later authors such as Mark C. Dillon and Carol Buchanan . 
 Mather , R. E. ; Boswell , F. E. ( 1987 ) . Hanging the Sheriff @-@ A Biography of Henry Plummer . Salt Lake City , Utah : University of Utah Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ 3 . 
 In Hanging the Sheriff , R. E. Mather and F. E. Boswell have radically redrawn the portrait of Sheriff Henry Plummer and effectively challenged the conventional justification of the Montana vigilantes of 1863 – 64 . The authors reject the vigilante defenders assertion that Plummer 's reign of terror necessitated the formation of a vigilance committee to bring law and order to the area . First , law had been established at Bannack through the miners ' court , Plummer 's election , and the arrival of Judge Edgerton in September 1863 . Second , Plummer 's alleged leadership of the road agents was based on an unsubstantiated and unexamined accusation . 
 Mather , R. E. ; F. E. Boswell ( 1991 ) . Vigilante Victims : Montana 's 1864 Hanging Spree . San Jose , CA : History West Publishing . 
 This is a " revisionist " history of the Vigilante movement that claims the road agents were victims of a plot perpetrated in a struggle for power between two factions , one favoring the North and the other favoring the South . It overlooks the cooperation between Pfouts , a strong Confederate , and Sanders , a Union abolitionist , in the leadership of the Vigilantes , and that Jack Gallagher was a Union sympathizer , while Boone Helm died shouting , " Hoorah for Jeff Davis ! " 
 Another account from John C. Fazio , who writes for the Cleveland Civil War Roundtable , contends that the Vigilance Committee of Alder Gulch had more to do with national politics than with dealing with criminals . He contends that Sidney Edgerton and Wilbur Sanders were pawns of Abraham Lincoln and other unionists who sought ways to rid Montana gold fields of southerners and confederate sympathizers . His views have been rebutted by novelist Carol Buchanan . 
 = = = Mock trial of Henry Plummer and Plummer 's pardon request = = = 
 On May 7 , 1993 , the Twin Bridges , Montana public schools organized a mock trial of Henry Plummer at the Madison County courthouse in Virginia City . The trial received national media attention . Adults and students role played events using the accounts of Dimsdale , X. Biedler and Langford . After a six hour trial , the jury of four men and eight women was in deadlock , 6 @-@ 6 . The student playing the role of Henry Plummer was told he was " free " . Based in part on the notoriety of the mock trial , academics sympathetic to the view that Plummer was innocent , petitioned the Montana Board of Pardons and Parole to grant Plummer a pardon . Although supported by a number of prominent historians and scholars , the pardon was denied by the board as Plummer had never actually been convicted of a crime in Montana and therefore the board was without jurisdiction to act . 
 = = Montana Vigilantes in media and literature = = 
 Ernest Haycox 's 1942 novel Alder Gulch depicts Bannack Sheriff Henry Plummer as a cold and calculating murderer and thief . 
 John Dehner played Henry Plummer in an episode of the 1950s western television series , Stories of the Century , starring and narrated by Jim Davis . 
 Montana Territory is a 1952 Western film starring Wanda Hendrix , Clayton Moore , Hugh Sanders and Lon McCallister . It is a classic western movie , with bandits , a corrupt sheriff [ Plummer ] and a hero who falls for a beautiful woman . 
 An episode of the TV series Overland Trail , The Montana Vigilantes aired in April 1960 . 
 In " Two for the Gallows " ( April 11 , 1961 ) of NBC 's Laramie , series character Slim Sherman ( John Smith ) is hired under false pretenses to take a " Professor <unk> " , played by Donald Woods , into the Badlands to seek gold . <unk> , however , is really Morgan Bennett , a member of the former Plummer gang who has escaped from prison . 
 The Missouri Breaks is a 1976 American western action film starring Marlon Brando and Jack Nicholson that portrays rustling and retribution in 1880s eastern Montana . 
 Buchanan , Carol ( 2008 ) . God 's Thunderbolt : The Vigilantes of Montana . Charleston , SC : <unk> Publishing . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . — An historical fiction novel set in Alder Gulch , Montana 1863 
 Little , Michael Edward ( 2010 ) . Twelve Quiet Men : The Story of the Cowboy Vigilantes Known as Stuart 's Stranglers at War with the Outlaws of Montana and Dakota in 1884 . <unk> Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 548 @-@ 9 . — an historical fiction novel . 
 Scottish folk act , The David <unk> Band , wrote a song about the story of Henry Plummer called ' Plummer 's Song ' released on their 2012 eponymous debut album . The song was written from the viewpoint of a member of the Bannack community who had reservation about Plummer 's alleged crimes . 
 = Viewtiful Joe = 
 Viewtiful Joe ( <unk> <unk> , Byūtifuru Jō ) is a side scrolling beat ' em up video game developed by Team Viewtiful for the GameCube . It was originally released in 2003 as a part of the Capcom Five under director Hideki Kamiya and producer Atsushi Inaba . The game was later ported to the PlayStation 2 by the same design team under the name Clover Studio , subtitled Aratanaru Kibō ( <unk> , lit . " A New Hope " ) in Japan . The game 's story concerns Joe , an avid movie @-@ goer whose girlfriend Silvia is kidnapped during a film starring Joe 's favorite superhero , Captain Blue . Joe is shortly thereafter thrust into Movieland , where Silvia is taken by the villainous group known as Jadow . After accepting a special V @-@ Watch from Captain Blue , Joe transforms into the tokusatsu @-@ style persona " Viewtiful Joe " and sets out to rescue her . 
 The gameplay of Viewtiful Joe features traditional 2D platform side @-@ scrolling intermixed with 3D cel @-@ shaded graphics . Abilities known as " VFX Powers " grant the player special actions for combat and puzzle @-@ solving , such as slowing down or speeding up time . Viewtiful Joe was critically acclaimed for its unique visual style and gameplay , earning itself a number of awards from various media publications . A minor commercial success , the game spawned a few sequels with releases seen on other consoles such as the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) and Nintendo DS . An anime adaption of the game was also produced . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Viewtiful Joe 's core gameplay is similar to a traditional side @-@ scrolling beat ' em up . Taking control of Joe , the player is mostly limited to moving left , right , up , and down on a fixed 2D path . The game contains platforming elements such as the ability to jump and double jump . Combat consists of fighting multiple enemies on screen at once , with the enemies appearing from all directions , including the foreground and background . Joe has the ability to punch , kick , and dodge — which he can do by leaping upward or ducking . Dodging enemies ' attacks successfully temporarily dazes them , leaving them wide open for attack . The player has certain number of hit points in the form of " Life Marks " located above the VFX Gauge , which decrease whenever Joe takes damage . Health can be restored by picking up hamburgers . 
 Viewtiful Joe features unique gameplay elements in the form of Joe 's " Viewtiful Effects ( VFX ) Power " , which is designed to emulate camera tricks seen in films . VFX Power is used in both battling enemies and solving various puzzles . These three powers are limited by the " VFX Gauge " located at the top of the screen . Normally , the meter is full , giving the player access to Joe 's super powers via his Viewtiful Joe transformation . The meter slowly empties when an ability is in use . Once it depletes , Viewtiful Joe changes to normal Joe , lowering his attack and defense and leaving him temporarily devoid of VFX Power . The VFX Gauge automatically refills over time and can also be manually filled by picking up bottles of " VFX Juice " . The first VFX Power is " Slow " , which slows time , causing the player 's attacks to be more powerful , increasing Joe 's reflexes , and allowing him to dodge attacks more easily . The second VFX Power , " Mach Speed " , allows Joe to move at a faster speed , creating multiple after @-@ images of him when he unleashes a flurry of attacks on all enemies on the screen . It can additionally cause his attacks to envelop Joe in a temporary heat shield , rendering him immune to flame attacks and setting enemies on fire when struck . The last VFX Power , " Zoom In " , causes a camera close @-@ up of Joe , powering up his normal attacks , granting him a set of new attacks , and paralyzing all lesser foes in proximity to him . However , any damage dealt to Joe whilst zoomed in is increased too . Any two VFX Powers can be combined . The VFX Gauge can be extended by collecting a certain number of V @-@ Films present in each stage . The bar reverts to its normal length when a new stage begins . 
 Defeating enemies gives the player " V @-@ Points " in the form of small and large coins , while using special attacks gives them " V @-@ Marks " , or " Viewtifuls " , which can be converted into V @-@ Points . Viewtifuls can be quickly gained by using combos or long chains of attacks . For example , while using Slow , striking a dazed enemy sets up all other enemies on the screen for a chain reaction , causing all points accrued during the duration of Slow to be multiplied by the number of enemies struck . If used deftly , the player will accumulate a large number of Viewtifuls due to the multiplier effect called " X @-@ Bonus " . Each stage in Viewtiful Joe consists of several interconnected missions , or scenes , that the player must complete in order to advance . When completing the stage , the player is graded on the number of V @-@ Points earned , the amount of time taken , and how much damage Joe took . V @-@ Points can be used between stages to purchase new abilities , expendable weapons ( which include the " <unk> " and " Shocking Pink Bombs " ) , more health , and health @-@ restorative items . Clearing the game on various difficulties allows players to play as different characters such as Silvia , Captain Blue and Alastor , with the PlayStation 2 version also allowing players to play as Devil May Cry 's Dante . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Viewtiful Joe is divided into seven stages , or " episodes " , interspersed with storyline cutscenes and bookended by an opening and ending cinematic . The setting is divided between Earth , or the real world , and " Movieland " , the game 's fictional world of films . The plot begins in a movie theatre on Earth in which the game 's central character Joe and his girlfriend Silvia are watching a tokusatsu drama starring the aged superhero Captain Blue . The movie 's antagonist , having seemingly defeated Captain Blue , suddenly reaches out of the screen and abducts Silvia , taking her into Movieland . Joe is likewise picked up and taken into Movieland by Captain Blue 's giant mecha . Inside the movie , Joe must rescue Silvia from the evil Jadow , the game 's organization of villains . To help him , Captain Blue entrusts him with a V @-@ Watch , a device Joe can use to transform into a superhero upon saying the word " <unk> ( transform ) . " Joe promptly does so , inventing his own catchphrase : " <unk> @-@ a @-@ go @-@ go , baby ! " 
 With the guidance of Captain Blue , Joe fights his way through a number of Movieland 's locations such as cities , underground caves , an underwater base , and a submarine , often travelling via his trusty , robot aircraft " Six Machine " . One by one , Joe defeats the members of the Jadow , the game 's bosses . These include Dark Fiend Charles the 3rd , Iron Ogre Hulk Davidson , Aquatic Terror Gran Bruce , a doppelgänger of Viewtiful Joe , and Blade Master Alastor . Before fighting Alastor , he reveals that in order for the Jadow to break out of Movieland and into the land of humans , they need the " DNA of the Creator " , namely Silvia . Joe makes his way to her , trumping the Jadow 's leader Inferno Lord Fire Leo in combat , only to witness Silvia being kidnapped once again afterwards . Joe and Six Machine race off into outer space after her in the game 's final episode . 
 Finding Silvia atop the control room of a space station , Joe discovers that Captain Blue has been behind the plot the entire time . The former hero reveals that he is the creator of the film in which they currently exist and that he is Silvia 's seemingly @-@ deceased father . Transforming into the colossal robot King Blue , the villain proclaims that he will take Sylvia 's energy by force in order to break into the real world . Joe tells him off , telling him that he 's no hero . Joe summons a newly transformed mecha " Six Majin " , and the two engage in combat . When the fight ends , Captain Blue and Viewtiful Joe abandon their respective vehicles and face off in a final battle within the space station . 
 Joe is victorious , and Captain Blue , finally coming to his senses , thanks the young hero for stopping him . He explains that two decades earlier , Blue was a revolutionary film maker who was soon thought of as a fad . Wanting nothing more than to create heroes , Blue was sucked into one of his own films , allowing him to live out his dream as a hero . However , he had lost touch with reality and wanted revenge on the people who had betrayed him . As Captain Blue and Silvia embrace in a heartfelt reunion , the director tells Joe that the story is not complete . He snaps his fingers , and the space station 's onboard computer warns of a large number of UFOs heading towards Earth . Blue tells Joe that a hero will be needed twice more to save the world . Joe attempts to leave but not before Silvia requests a V @-@ Watch from her father and to accompany her boyfriend . Viewtiful Joe and a newly transformed Silvia head out to stop the impending threat together . 
 = = Development = = 
 Viewtiful Joe was developed by the design staff " Team Viewtiful " , a part of Capcom Production Studio 4 . The game was announced in late 2002 as part of the Capcom Five , a line @-@ up of five then @-@ upcoming GameCube games to introduce new content to the console . It was directed by Capcom alumnus Hideki Kamiya , whose previous credits include the planning of Resident Evil and Resident Evil 2 and the direction of Devil May Cry . It was produced by Atsushi Inaba , who previously worked on the Ace Attorney series and Steel Battalion . In its earliest stages of development , Viewtiful Joe went under the working title " Red Hot Man " , but the name was changed due to copyright conflicts with the American rock band Red Hot Chili Peppers . Viewtiful Joe 's development team initially consisted of six people working under a twelve @-@ month deadline . As work continued , the size of the team grew , and development ended up taking a full 21 months to complete . The game was conceived as a " staff @-@ focused project " aimed at increasing the skill of its creators , specifically director Kamiya . 
 Inaba stated , " We wanted to create was a challenging game with stunning visuals and fluid gameplay " . As a lifelong fan of superheroes , Inaba 's aim was to combine traditional Japanese tokusatsu with American comic books . The character designs created by Kumiko Suekane were inspired specifically by 1960s and 1970s Japanese @-@ costumed tokusatsu television shows such as Kamen Rider and Ultraman . Graphically , the game adopted a 2D side @-@ scrolling style mixed with 3D cel @-@ shaded animation . Despite many games in the then @-@ modern industry shying away from 2D graphical formats , Inaba said , " We have been able to breathe new life into the genre because we are using a new stylistic way that hasn 't been seen before . " The team chose the GameCube as its platform because of their target audience and because it lent itself well to Viewtiful Joe 's gameplay . 
 The musical score for Viewtiful Joe was co @-@ composed by Masakazu Sugimori and Masami Ueda . It was released alongside the score for Viewtiful Joe 2 on a double album titled Viewtiful Joe + Viewtiful Joe 2 Original Soundtrack in Japan on 22 December 2004 by Suleputer . A music video is played within the game featuring a rap vocal song titled " Viewtiful World " composed by <unk> The video features a group of people , including Inaba himself , motion captured as some of the game 's characters . On 11 June 2003 , Avex released the video on DVD and released the song as a single . Both the North American and Japanese releases of Viewtiful Joe feature English voice acting in order to keep a " western comic book feel to [ the game ] . " Voice @-@ over work in Viewtiful Joe was provided by Soundelux Design Music Group . Voice actors for the game include Dee Bradley Baker , Christina <unk> , Gregg Berger , Mikey Kelley , Roger Rose , and Kevin Michael Richardson . Director Hideki Kamiya provides the voice for Six Machine . 
 A budget re @-@ release of the game for the GameCube titled Viewtiful Joe : Revival was released in Japan in late 2003 , adding a " Sweet Mode " to decrease the difficulty setting from the original game 's " Kids Mode " . A PlayStation 2 port of Viewtiful Joe was released by Clover Studio in 2004 . It was released in Japan with the subtitle A New Hope . The release added the character Dante of Devil May Cry as an unlockable character . The PlayStation 2 version does not feature progressive scan seen in the GameCube version . The game was also re @-@ released under Nintendo 's GameCube Player 's Choice label in 2004 in North America and Europe . 
 It is said that Director Kamiya based Joe 's run animation on how he got to work , and the bosses of the game are based on Capcom executives . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews and sales = = = 
 Viewtiful Joe received positive reviews upon its release . The GameCube version of the game currently holds a GameRankings aggregate score of 92 % , while its PlayStation 2 port holds a score of 88 % . Metacritic lists the GameCube and PlayStation 2 versions of the game at 93 out of 100 and 90 out of 100 , respectively . The game 's graphics , gameplay , and challenge have all been common areas of praise among many reviewers . IGN gave Viewtiful Joe an " Outstanding " rating , noting that the beautiful cel @-@ shaded graphics and high @-@ intensity action make it one of the best action games on the GameCube and PlayStation 2 . Likewise , Eurogamer called it " imaginative , beautiful , engaging and above all else entertaining " . Game Informer praised it as " a completely original and highly entertaining work of art " . Criticisms about Viewtiful Joe have been few but consistent among reviews . IGN complained of the game 's lack of boss variety . GameSpy has concurred , noting that the bosses were too easy due to a powerful attack that the player can perform . Reviewers have also criticized the lack of progressive scan in the game 's PlayStation 2 port . IGN and Eurogamer have additionally pointed out that the PlayStation 2 port suffers slowdown in later stages of the game . 
 In Japan , the GameCube version of Viewtiful Joe sold through its initial shipment of less than 100 @,@ 000 copies during the week of its release . Preorders of the GameCube version sold out on Capcom 's North American website prior to its ship date , and Viewtiful Joe debuted as the tenth best @-@ selling game in the region . The PlayStation 2 version sold a poor 9 @,@ 912 units in its first week of release in Japan . Worldwide , sales of the game reached 275 @,@ 000 copies on the GameCube and 46 @,@ 000 on the PlayStation 2 . Sales of the game in both North America and Europe were lower than what Capcom had predicted , but due to its small budget , the game was considered by Inaba to be relatively successful commercially . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Viewtiful Joe garnered a number of awards and nominations from various magazines , popular gaming websites , and video game award programs . IGN named Viewtiful Joe " GameCube Game of the Year " and " Best Action Game of 2003 " . At GameSpot 's Best of 2003 , the game was nominated for " Best Artistic Achievement in a Game " , " Coolest New Character " , " Best GameCube Game " , " Readers ' Choice Best GameCube Action Game " , and " Readers ' Choice GameCube Game of the Year " . It was also named the fourth @-@ best GameCube game of 2003 by GameSpy , winning the website 's " Most Stylish " award for the year . Viewtiful Joe won " Most Innovative Game Design " in Nintendo Power magazine 's 2003 Player 's Choice Awards . It won " GameCube Game of the Year " awards for 2003 from both USA Today and GMR . The game was nominated by the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences for " Platform Action / Adventure Game of the Year " in 2003 and was nominated for three British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) Awards including " Best Design " , " Best Intro / Animation " , and " Best GameCube Game " . The game won " Unsung Hero Game of the Year " at the 2003 Golden Joystick Awards and " Best New Franchise " at the 2004 G @-@ Phoria awards . Finally , it was recognized at the 4th Annual Game Developers Choice Awards as one of three " Game Innovation Spotlights " . 
 Viewtiful Joe has been included in a number of " best games " lists in the years following its release . It was rated the 27th best game made on a Nintendo system in Nintendo Power 's " Top 200 Games " list in February 2006 and the 10th best game on the GameCube in its August 2008 issue reflecting on the top 20 games for each system . Both GameSpy and the G4 television program X @-@ Play named Viewtiful Joe the ninth best game of all time for the GameCube . In 2007 , Viewtiful Joe was named the 17th best GameCube game of all time in IGN 's feature reflecting on the system 's long lifespan . Later in 2007 , ScrewAttack listed the game at seventh on their Top 10 GameCube Games of All Time . 
 Viewtiful Joe was successful enough to establish a franchise , and a few other related media titles were released . Viewtiful Joe was followed by a direct sequel titled Viewtiful Joe 2 — released for both the GameCube and PlayStation 2 — and two spinoffs : Viewtiful Joe : Red Hot Rumble for the PSP and GameCube and Viewtiful Joe : Double Trouble ! for the Nintendo DS . An anime adaption of the game was produced by Group TAC , airing on the Japanese television station TV Tokyo beginning in 2004 and being licensed for US distribution by Geneon Entertainment in 2005 . A set of Viewtiful Joe trading figures was released by <unk> Entertainment in October 2005 , while a series of action figures made by Jazwares was released in July 2006 . 
 In 2004 , Capcom registered the domain name <unk> , suggesting another sequel . Shortly thereafter , the website was devoid of content . In January 2006 , Atsushi Inaba expressed interest in developing a title in the series for the Wii . However , as none of Clover Studio 's games proved to be an outstanding financial success , Capcom officially dissolved the subsidiary in March 2007 after the release of its final two games , Ōkami and God Hand . Its key members left to form a new company called Platinum Games . Capcom producer Jun Takeuchi commented at the 2009 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International that there have been currently no plans to continue with the series , although Viewtiful Joe has appeared as a playable character in Capcom 's 2008 Wii fighting game Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Ultimate All Stars and is a playable character in Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . 
 However , in 2012 , Platinum Games announced the development of The Wonderful 101 , then known as Project P @-@ 100 . This was the first project that reunited Kamiya and Inaba as director and producer on a title since the development of the Viewtiful Joe series . Furthermore , The Wonderful 101 uses the same tokusatsu thematics of the Viewtiful Joe series , and the two share a similar art style albeit different gameplay . This has led fans to hail The Wonderful 101 as a spiritual successor of sorts . The franchise would also later be featured in Archie Comics ' Worlds Unite crossover with several other Capcom and Sega series , taking place in the Sonic the Hedgehog and Mega Man comics . 
 = Constitutional history of Zimbabwe = 
 The constitutional history of Zimbabwe starts with the arrival of white people to what was dubbed Southern Rhodesia in the 1890s . The country was initially run by an administrator appointed by the British South Africa Company . The prime ministerial role was first created in October 1923 , when the country achieved responsible government , with Sir Charles Coghlan as its first Premier . The third Premier , George Mitchell , renamed the post Prime Minister in 1933 . 
 The Rhodesian Prime Minister acted as Head of His or Her Majesty 's Rhodesian Government , under the largely symbolic supervision of a British colonial Governor , until Rhodesia issued its unrecognised Unilateral Declaration of Independence on 11 November 1965 . British @-@ appointed figures such as the Governor were thereafter ignored by Salisbury . The unrecognised state 's system of government , however , remained otherwise unchanged , right down to its declared loyalty to Elizabeth II , which Britain did not acknowledge . This situation remained until March 1970 , when Rhodesia adopted a republican system of government . In republican Rhodesia , the Prime Minister instead nominally reported to the President . 
 The Prime Minister was responsible for nominating the other members of the government , chairing meetings of the Rhodesian Cabinet , and deciding when to call a new general election for the House of Assembly . He retained this role following the reconstitution of Rhodesia under black majority rule , first into Zimbabwe Rhodesia in 1979 , then into Zimbabwe the following year . The Zimbabwean government was headed by a Prime Minister from 1980 to 1987 , when that post was superseded by an executive presidency . The former Prime Minister , Robert Mugabe , became President ; as of 2015 he retains this post . 
 = = 1890 – 1923 : British South Africa Company rule = = 
 = = = Context = = = 
 Having secured the Rudd Concession on mining rights from King Lobengula of Matabeleland on 30 October 1888 , Cecil Rhodes and his British South Africa Company were granted a Royal Charter by Queen Victoria in October 1889 . Under this charter , the Company was empowered to trade with indigenous rulers , form banks , own and manage land , and raise and run a police force . In return for these rights , the British South Africa Company would administer and develop any territory it acquired , while respecting laws enacted by extant African rulers , and upholding free trade within its borders . Though the Company made good on most of these pledges , the assent of Lobengula and other native leaders , particularly regarding mining rights , was often evaded , misrepresented or simply ignored . Lobengula reacted by making war on the new arrivals , their Tswana allies and the local Mashona people in 1893 . The resulting conflict ended with Lobengula 's torching of his own capital at Bulawayo , his death from smallpox in early 1894 , and the subsequent submission of his izinDuna ( advisors ) to the Company . Violent rebellion to the north @-@ east , in neighbouring Mashonaland , was forcibly put down by the Company during 1897 . 
 Following these victories , the British South Africa Company controlled a country equivalent to modern Zambia and Zimbabwe . This domain was initially referred to as " <unk> " ( or Zambezia ) after the Zambezi , which bisected it ; however , the first immigrants almost immediately began instead calling their new home " Rhodesia " in honour of their Company benefactor , and this name was officially adopted in 1895 . Matabeleland and Mashonaland , both of which lay south of the Zambezi , were first formally referred to by Britain as " Southern Rhodesia " in 1898 , and were united under that name in 1901 . The areas to the river 's north , <unk> @-@ North @-@ Western Rhodesia and North @-@ Eastern Rhodesia , were governed separately , and amalgamated in 1911 to form Northern Rhodesia . 
 = = = Company administrators = = = 
 The head of the southern territories ' government during this time was in effect the Company 's regional administrator . The first of these was appointed in 1890 , soon after the Pioneer Column 's establishment of Fort Salisbury , the capital , on 12 September that year . From 1899 , the administrator governed as part of a ten @-@ man Legislative Council , originally made up of himself , five other members nominated by the Company , and four elected by registered voters . The number of elected members rose gradually under Company rule until they numbered 13 in 1920 , sitting alongside the administrator and six other Company officials in the 20 @-@ member Legislative Council . The Company 's Royal Charter , which originally ran out in October 1914 , was renewed for a further ten years in 1915 . 
 The post of national administrator was held by three people , with three others holding the post while it only covered Mashonaland ; between 1898 and 1901 , a separate office existed in Matabeleland . 
 = = = Frontier politics : towards responsible government = = = 
 Southern Rhodesians of all races fought for Britain in the First World War , during which the Responsible Government Association ( RGA ) was formed in 1917 . By 1919 , Sir Charles Coghlan , a South African @-@ born Bulawayo lawyer , had become the RGA 's leader . The RGA sought self @-@ government for Southern Rhodesia within the British Empire — the same " responsible government " previously granted to Britain 's colonies in Australia , Canada , New Zealand and South Africa as a precursor to full dominion status — and opposed Southern Rhodesia 's proposed integration into the recently formed Union of South Africa . The accession of territories governed by the British South Africa Company was explicitly provisioned for by Section 150 of the South Africa Act 1909 , the British Act of Parliament which created the union in 1910 by consolidating the Empire 's Cape , Natal , Orange River and Transvaal Colonies into a unitary dominion . The Company originally stood against Southern Rhodesia 's addition , fearing the territory 's potential domination by Afrikaners , but changed its tune dramatically when , in 1918 , the Privy Council in London ruled that <unk> land in the Rhodesias was owned not by the Company but by the Crown . 
 The loss of the ability to raise funds through the sale of land hampered the Company 's ability to pay dividends to its shareholders , and caused its development of Southern Rhodesia to slow . Believing that membership in the union could help solve both problems , the Company now backed Southern Rhodesia 's incorporation as South Africa 's fifth province . However , this prospect proved largely unpopular among Southern Rhodesian settlers , most of whom wanted self @-@ government , and came to vote for the RGA in large numbers . In the 1920 Legislative Council election , the RGA won ten of the 13 seats contested . A referendum on the colony 's future was held on 27 October 1922 — at the suggestion of Winston Churchill , then Britain 's Colonial Secretary , continuing the initiative of his <unk> Viscount Milner — and responsible government won the day by 59 % . Southern Rhodesia was duly annexed by the Empire on 12 September 1923 , and granted full self @-@ government on 1 October the same year . The new Southern Rhodesian government immediately purchased the land from the British Treasury for £ 2 million , and ten years later paid the same sum to the British South Africa Company for the country 's mineral rights . 
 = = 1923 – 1965 : colonial Prime Ministers = = 
 = = = Responsible government ; early years ( 1923 – 53 ) = = = 
 The RGA reorganised itself to become the governing Rhodesia Party , with Coghlan as Southern Rhodesia 's first Premier . The title was changed to Prime Minister in 1933 by George Mitchell , the third man to hold the office . In 1932 , the Southern Rhodesian leader was first invited to an Imperial Conference . Although Southern Rhodesia was not a dominion , it was seen elsewhere in the Empire as a sui generis case among Britain 's colonies , and worthy of inclusion , particularly as it was the only one which governed itself . Southern Rhodesian Prime Ministers thereafter became a regular fixture at such meetings and , from 1944 , at Commonwealth Prime Ministers ' Conferences . 
 The Rhodesia Party remained in power until September 1933 , when , despite narrowly topping the popular vote , it lost the month 's election , winning only nine of the 30 seats compared to the Reform Party 's 16 . Although the Reform Party was left @-@ wing in name , many of its leading members , including the new Prime Minister Dr Godfrey Huggins , were politically conservative ; the more rightist members of the party merged with the Rhodesia Party in 1934 to form the United Party , and , with Huggins at the helm , roundly defeated the rump left wing of the Reform Party to begin 28 years of uninterrupted stewardship . 
 Though uninvolved in foreign affairs , and therefore obliged to follow Britain 's lead , the colony enthusiastically supported the mother country during the Second World War , symbolically affirming the British declaration of war before any other part of the Empire . During the ensuing conflict over 26 @,@ 100 Southern Rhodesians of all races served in the armed forces , pro rata to white population a higher contribution of manpower than any other British colony or dominion , and more than the UK itself . George VI knighted Huggins in 1941 , and , with the war still ongoing , Britain made overtures towards dominion status . Huggins dismissed this , saying it was imperative to win the war first . The idea of dominionship was raised again in 1952 , but Salisbury once more did not pursue it , instead following the results of a referendum held early the next April to enter an initially semi @-@ independent Federation with the directly administered British colonies of Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland . 
 = = = As a territory in the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland ( 1953 – 63 ) = = = 
 A month after Southern Rhodesia , Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland formed the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland in August 1953 , Huggins became the amalgamated body 's first Prime Minister . Salisbury was designated the Federal capital , and the United Party renamed itself the United Rhodesia Party . Garfield Todd took over as Southern Rhodesia 's Prime Minister . Huggins headed the Federal government for three years , then retired in November 1956 after a combined 23 years as a national leader . The United Rhodesia Party merged with the Federal Party to become the United Federal Party ( UFP ) in November 1957 , and the liberal Todd was voted out of office by the more right @-@ wing members of his party four months later , in February 1958 . He was replaced by Sir Edgar Whitehead . Todd led his own version of the United Rhodesia Party against the UFP and the Dominion Party in June the same year , but failed to win a single seat — the UFP won 17 of the 30 seats , with the Dominion Party taking the remainder . 
 Whitehead served as Prime Minister for the next four years , under Federal leader Roy Welensky , as black nationalist ambitions and changing international attitudes propelled the Federation towards collapse . In Southern Rhodesia , constitutional changes adopted in 1961 as the result of a referendum split the heretofore non @-@ racial ( though qualified ) electoral roll into graduated " A " and " B " rolls ; the latter had lower qualifications , and was intended to cater for prospective black voters who had previously not qualified . 
 This plan was given assent by the Southern Rhodesian and British governments , and initially enjoyed support from black nationalists in the country , though the latter soon reversed their stance , saying the changes did not go far enough . Some government members opposed this partitioning of the electorate , which essentially divided it along ethnic lines ; the UFP 's chief whip in the Federal assembly , Ian Smith , resigned in protest , saying the new system was " racialist " . Former Dominion Party leader Winston Field formed the pro @-@ independence Rhodesian Front ( RF ) in 1962 to contest that November 's Southern Rhodesian election , with Smith running as his deputy , and in a shock result won 35 of the 50 territorial " A " -roll seats . Field and Smith became Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister respectively , and remained in office after the Federation 's dissolution on the last day of 1963 . 
 = = = From Federation to UDI ( 1964 – 65 ) = = = 
 After the Federation broke up on 31 December 1963 , Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland became independent during 1964 , respectively renamed Zambia and Malawi , and under black majority governments . Southern Rhodesia was denied the same under the ideal of " no independence before majority rule " that was newly ascendant in Britain and elsewhere . The RF was enraged by what it saw as British duplicity ; according to Field and Smith , Britain 's Deputy Prime Minister and First Secretary of State R. A. Butler had verbally promised " independence no later than , if not before , the other two territories " at a meeting in 1963 , in return for Salisbury 's help in winding up the Federation . Butler denied having said this . 
 Under severe pressure from his ministers to resolve this issue , Field travelled to England in March 1964 to pursue sovereign statehood , but returned empty @-@ handed a month later . He resigned his position on 13 April ; this came as no surprise to many government insiders , but appeared sudden to most sections of the general public . Smith promptly accepted the cabinet 's invitation to take over , though he expressed surprise at the nomination . A farmer and erstwhile British Royal Air Force pilot from the rural town of Selukwe , Smith was Southern Rhodesia 's first native @-@ born head of government . He immediately promised to take a harder line on independence than his predecessor . 
 Only two months into his premiership , Smith was deeply offended when Whitehall informed him that , for the first time since 1930 , Southern Rhodesia would not be represented at the Commonwealth Prime Ministers ' Conference . Huggins described this in 1969 as tantamount to " kicking [ Southern Rhodesia ] out of the Commonwealth " . When Northern Rhodesia became Zambia on 24 October 1964 , Southern Rhodesia dropped " Southern " from its name , and initiated legislation to this effect . Britain refused assent two months later , saying that although the colony was self @-@ governing , it did not have the power to rename itself . Salisbury continued using the shortened name anyway . 
 The Rhodesian government , which remained predominantly white , contended that it had almost complete support from all races in its drive for full statehood ; in October 1964 , a national indaba ( tribal conference ) comprising 622 black representatives unanimously backed independence under the 1961 constitution , and a month later a general independence referendum yielded an 89 % " yes " vote for the same . Harold Wilson 's British Labour Cabinet did not give credence to either of these tests of opinion , and continued to insist on an immediate shift to majority rule before the granting of sovereign independence . Campaigning on an election promise of independence , the RF called a new general election for May 1965 , and won all 50 " A " -roll seats . 
 Negotiations between Smith and Wilson took place throughout the rest of the year , but repeatedly broke down ; between July and September , a parallel development concerned Rhodesia 's opening of a representative mission in Lisbon , which Britain opposed , but proved unable to stop . Soon after Smith visited London in October 1965 , Wilson resolved to curb his rival 's ambitions . During his own visit to Salisbury later that month , he proposed to safeguard future black representation in the Rhodesian parliament by withdrawing control over the Rhodesian parliamentary structure to London . Salisbury had held these powers since 1923 . This proved the last straw for Smith 's Rhodesian government , which issued the Unilateral Declaration of Independence ( UDI ) on 11 November . 
 = = 1965 – 80 : UDI era = = 
 = = = <unk> state ( 1965 – 79 ) = = = 
 The Rhodesians modelled their independence document on that of the American Thirteen Colonies in 1776 , which remains the only other such proclamation in the history of the British Empire . According to UDI — which went unrecognised by Britain , the Commonwealth and the United Nations , all of which declared it illegal and imposed economic sanctions — the Rhodesian government still professed loyalty to Elizabeth II , whom it called the " Queen of Rhodesia " . The British @-@ appointed Governor , Sir Humphrey Gibbs , remained at his post in Salisbury , but was now ignored by the local government , which appointed its own " Officer <unk> the Government " to fill his ceremonial role . Smith represented Rhodesia in two abortive rounds of talks with Wilson , first aboard HMS Tiger in 1966 , then on HMS Fearless two years later . Under Rhodesia 's 1965 constitution , the Prime Minister remained at the head of Her Majesty 's Rhodesian Government until 2 March 1970 , when a republican constitution was adopted in line with the results of a referendum held the previous June . In the Republic of Rhodesia , the Prime Minister formally reported to the President . 
 Smith and the RF decisively won three more general elections during the 1970s . The Anglo @-@ Rhodesian Agreement of 1971 – 72 , which would have legitimised the country 's independence in Britain 's eyes , fell apart after a British test of Rhodesian national opinion reported most blacks to be against it . The Rhodesian Bush War , fought against the government by the Zimbabwe African National Liberation Army ( ZANLA ) and the Zimbabwe People 's Revolutionary Army ( ZIPRA ) , the respective guerrilla armies of the Maoist Zimbabwe African National Union ( ZANU ) and its Warsaw Pact @-@ aligned Marxist rival , the Zimbabwe African People 's Union ( ZAPU ) , intensified soon after , starting with ZANLA 's attack on Altena and Whistlefield Farms in the country 's north @-@ east in December 1972 . After a strong security force counter @-@ campaign , the South African détente initiative of December 1974 introduced a ceasefire , which the security forces respected , and the guerrillas ignored . This shifted the course of the war significantly in the nationalists ' favour . 
 Mozambican independence under a communist government in 1975 further assisted the cadres , and exacerbated the Rhodesian government 's economic dependency on South Africa . <unk> talks between Smith and the guerrilla leaders took place at Victoria Falls in 1975 , then in Geneva the following year . In March 1978 , the Internal Settlement was agreed between the government and moderate nationalist parties , the most prominent of which was Bishop Abel Muzorewa 's United African National Council ( UANC ) . The militant nationalist campaigns continued , however , and indeed extended to attacks on civilian aircraft : ZAPU shot down Air Rhodesia Flight 825 in September 1978 , then Air Rhodesia Flight 827 in February 1979 . ZANU and ZAPU boycotted the elections held per the Internal Settlement in April 1979 , which UN Security Council Resolution 448 called " sham elections ... [ held ] in utter defiance of the United Nations " . In these elections , the UANC won a majority in the new House of Assembly , with 51 of the 72 common roll seats ( for which universal suffrage applied ) and 67 % of the popular vote . The RF took all 20 of the seats elected by white voters and also provided eight non @-@ constituency members . All of this settled , Rhodesia became black majority @-@ ruled Zimbabwe Rhodesia on 1 June 1979 , with Muzorewa replacing Smith as Prime Minister . 
 = = = Internal Settlement ; interim British control ( 1979 – 80 ) = = = 
 With Muzorewa and the UANC in government , Zimbabwe Rhodesia failed to gain international acceptance . ZANU leader Robert Mugabe publicly damned Muzorewa 's new order , dismissing the bishop as a " neocolonial puppet " ; he pledged to continue ZANLA 's campaign " to the last man " . Muzorewa took office at the head of a UANC – RF coalition cabinet made up of 12 blacks and five whites . " Instead of the enemy wearing a white skin , he will soon wear a black skin , " said Mugabe , just before the bishop took over . The Bush War went on until December 1979 , when Salisbury , Whitehall and the revolutionary nationalists signed the Lancaster House Agreement in London . Zimbabwe Rhodesia came under the temporary control of Britain , and a Commonwealth monitoring force was convened to supervise fresh elections , in which ZANU and ZAPU would take part for the first time . ZANU won , and , with Mugabe as Prime Minister , formed the first government of Zimbabwe following its recognised independence on 18 April 1980 . 
 = = Since 1980 : Zimbabwe = = 
 = = = Prime Minister and ceremonial President ( 1980 – 87 ) = = = 
 Seven years into Mugabe 's premiership , Zimbabwe scrapped the white seats amid sweeping constitutional reforms in September 1987 . The office of Prime Minister was abolished in October ; Mugabe became the country 's first executive President two months later . Mugabe and the ZAPU leader Joshua Nkomo signed a unity accord at the same time merging ZAPU into ZANU – PF with the stated goal of a Marxist – Leninist one @-@ party state . 
 = = = Executive President ( since 1987 ) = = = 
 = National Intercollegiate Band = 
 The National Intercollegiate Band ( NIB ) is a concert band , sponsored by honorary band fraternity and sorority Kappa Kappa Psi and Tau Beta Sigma , that performs every two years at the national convention of the two organizations . Organized in 1947 , the NIB is the oldest national intercollegiate band in the United States , and is open to all collegiate band members regardless of membership in Kappa Kappa Psi or Tau Beta Sigma . 
 Since 1953 , the National Intercollegiate Band has been the resident ensemble of Kappa Kappa Psi and Tau Beta Sigma 's Commissioning Program , which has added thirty new works to the band repertoire since its inception and is the longest @-@ running commissioning program for wind band music in the United States . 
 The National Intercollegiate Band has performed under the baton of some of the most renowned wind band conductors in the history of the ensemble , including William Revelli , Frederick Fennell , James Croft , and others , several of whom have been honored as inductees into the National Band Association Hall of Fame of Distinguished Band Conductors . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early steps , 1922 – 1947 = = = 
 In 1922 , Kappa Kappa Psi announced its plan to hold the first national intercollegiate band contest in American history . A brief dispatch in the 1922 Baton explained , " Sometime within the next two years the Kappa Kappa Psi Fraternity will hold a National Intercollegiate Band Contest . This enterprise will be the first of its kind ever attempted . As Music ( sic ) is becoming the foremost Art in America , our Fraternity aims to assist in so spreading the good work . " This early announcement did not culminate in a contest , and the idea of a national intercollegiate band was not revisited again by Kappa Kappa Psi until the 1940s . 
 In the meantime , the first Kappa Kappa Psi @-@ sponsored intercollegiate band was established by F. Lee Bowling in 1933 , with musicians from the University of Colorado ( home of the Alpha Iota chapter of Kappa Kappa Psi ) , the University of Denver ( Alpha Lambda ) , Colorado State College of Agricultural and Mechanical Arts ( Kappa ) , Colorado State College of Education ( Alpha Theta ) , the Colorado School of Mines ( Xi ) , and the University of Utah participating . In 1934 , the University of Utah left the intercollegiate band and the University of Wyoming ( Alpha Nu ) took its place . The concerts held by this Rocky Mountain Intercollegiate Band were sponsored by the local chapters of Kappa Kappa Psi and many members of the fraternity participated in the ensemble . The first concert of the Rocky Mountain Intercollegiate Band was held in February 1933 , and the band gave annual concerts during Denver Music Week . Bowling left the band 's managership in 1937 . 
 = = = National Intercollegiate Band established , 1947 = = = 
 Bowling was elected Grand President of Kappa Kappa Psi in 1941 and presented a plan to hold a national intercollegiate band concert , modeled after the Rocky Mountain intercollegiate bands . The delegation endorsed the plan , which was to be executed at the next biennial national convention in Stillwater in 1943 , the silver jubilee of the fraternity . However , due to World War II , the 1943 and 1945 national conventions were not held , and so the next biennial convention was held in 1947 . The first National Intercollegiate Band gave a concert on the evening of Friday , March 7 , 1947 . All delegates , officers , and visitors to the convention performed in the ensemble , which was augmented by Kappa Kappa Psi members from the Oklahoma A & M Symphonic Band so the band had a balanced instrumentation . 
 Grand First Vice @-@ President William A. Scroggs , founder of the fraternity , conducted the band in their first piece , Semper Fidelis . Max A. Mitchell , Grand Second Vice @-@ President , conducted Leonard Smith 's Spanish Caprice , a piece for band and solo cornet . Bohumil Makovsky , Past Grand President and Chairman of the Board of Trustees , conducted his march , Kappa Kappa Psi , and F. Lee Bowling conducted J. DeForest Cline 's Kappa Kappa Psi march . The 1947 NIB was recognized as the first @-@ ever intercollegiate band assembled with a national scope in the United States . Since 1947 , the fraternity has presented the F. Lee Bowling Participation Award to the college or university who has had the most students participate in the National Intercollegiate Band , regardless of membership in Kappa Kappa Psi or Tau Beta Sigma . In the case of a tie , multiple awards are presented . 
 The 1957 National Intercollegiate Band performed in the Salt Lake Tabernacle in Salt Lake City on August 24 , 1957 , under the direction of Lieutenant Colonel William F. <unk> , retired director of the United States Marine Band . The band comprised 112 musicians from Utah , Florida , Maryland , Colorado , Ohio , Texas , Indiana , and New Mexico , and premiered Robert Russell Bennett 's new work Symphonic Songs for Band . 
 In 1969 , the fiftieth anniversary of Kappa Kappa Psi , there were enough performers to create two bands . The National Intercollegiate Symphonic Band , the top ensemble , was conducted by Norman Dello Joio and premiered his new work , Songs of Abelard . The Symphonic Band also performed several other Dello Joio works , including Scenes from the Louvre , Variants on a Mediaeval Tune , and Fantasies on a Theme by Haydn . The National Intercollegiate Concert Band was conducted by Past Grand President Jay L. Slaughter , and performed <unk> 's Kappa Kappa Psi march and several other works . 
 = = = National Intercollegiate Marching Band , 2002 = = = 
 In June and July 2002 , Kappa Kappa Psi and Tau Beta Sigma sponsored the first National Intercollegiate Marching Band , which traveled to the French Riviera , including the cities of Nice , Grasse , Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence , Cannes , Antibes , and the Principality of Monaco . The thirty @-@ five member band , directed by Past National President Dr. Michael <unk> , performed at Le <unk> in Cannes , in Nice , and in front of the Prince 's Palace of Monaco . Despite being billed as the " first biennial " intercollegiate marching band , the program was dissolved by the joint national councils after the inaugural trip due to its high cost and low attendance , which was believed to be caused by a fear of traveling abroad after the September 11 attacks . 
 = = Guest artists = = 
 = = = Featured composer = = = 
 In 1953 , Kappa Kappa Psi Grand President Hugh McMillen began the Commissioning Program to add new music to the band repertoire , beginning with a $ 500 commission of Don Gillis , who provided Ballet for Band for the NIB . The Commissioning Program is now the longest @-@ running commissioning program for wind band music in American history , and has produced works that have secured a place in the emerging band canon and have garnered critical acclaim , such as Robert Russell Bennett 's Symphonic Songs for Band and Karel Husa 's Concerto for Trumpet and Wind Orchestra . 
 = = = Guest conductors = = = 
 = = = Guest performers = = = 
 In the late 1960s and early 1970s , the National Intercollegiate Band featured professional guest artists as soloists with the band . Two of these , T. N. Retif and Raymond Crisara , were featured soloists in that year 's commissioned piece : Retif on Dello Joio 's Songs of Abelard and Crisara on Karel Husa 's Concerto for Trumpet and Wind Orchestra . 
 Sigurd <unk> , saxophone ( 1967 ) 
 Leonard B. Smith , cornet ( 1969 ) 
 T. N. Retif , baritone voice ( 1969 ) 
 John D. Mohler , clarinet ( 1971 ) 
 Raymond Crisara , trumpet ( 1973 ) 
 = Hurricane Lily ( 1971 ) = 
 Hurricane Lily was a short @-@ lived Category 1 hurricane of August 1971 that devastated the city of Puerto Vallarta in Mexico . Forming from an area of cloudiness associated with former Atlantic Tropical Storm Chloe , the storm slowly intensified , building to peak intensity just before landfall northwest of Manzanillo , Colima on August 31 . The hurricane quickly weakened and became extratropical . After leaving land , the extratropical remnants of Lily dissipated on September 1 . The storm 's movement close to land affected shipping due to the limited warning , which was partially set back due to difficulties in clarifying the hurricane 's position on radar from reconnaissance aircraft . 
 The hurricane was Puerto Vallarta 's worst in two decades and the second hurricane of the season to heavily impact Mexico after Hurricane Bridget . The storm caused the <unk> River to overflow its banks , inundating the downtown section of Puerto Vallarta with water that was up to 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) deep in some sections . The Mexican army flew in aid after trucks were blocked by flooded roads . The hurricane claimed three lives on the mainland and nine lives when a boat capsized . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 25 , Tropical Storm Chloe made landfall on British Honduras ( present day Belize ) as a tropical depression . After dissipating , the remnants of the storm crossed into the Pacific Ocean , where they contributed to an area of shower activity that persisted over the Gulf of Tehuantepec . On August 28 , the tropical activity organized around a circulation which quickly developed into a tropical depression the same day . The depression was upgraded to a tropical storm on August 29 based on satellite presentation that depicted significant cirrus outflow and a comma – shaped cloud mass spanning 2 ° of latitude in diameter and was subsequently named Lily . 
 Following its upgrade to tropical storm intensity , Lily began developing a spiral cloud structure and heavy anticyclonic outflow on August 30 and was upgraded to a hurricane the same day . During its intensification , United States Air Force reconnaissance tried to fly into the hurricane , but penetration was rendered impossible due to the cumulonimbus clouds in the spiral bands , causing the aircraft to rely on radar readings , which showed an eye 40 miles ( 65 km ) in diameter . Following the flight , the hurricane turned to the north @-@ northwestward towards the Mexican coast . On August 31 , a ship called the <unk> reported a 980 @-@ millibar ( 29 inHg ) sea – level pressure while in the eye of the hurricane . Shortly after the report , the hurricane peaked in intensity with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) just prior to landfall 30 miles ( 50 km ) northwest of Manzanillo . The cyclone quickly weakened overland , and after only six hours over land , its winds weakened to only 30 mph ( 50 km / h ) , a decline of 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) and the cyclone became extratropical . The now – extratropical Lily continued to cross the Mexican coast , and shortly after emerging over water on September 1 , the cyclone dissipated . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The north @-@ northwestward track Lily took off the Mexican coast was not well @-@ forecast due in part to difficulties in interpreting the radar data from the reconnaissance flight . As a result , many ships got caught in hurricane @-@ force winds and high seas while trying to cross between it and the coastline . The <unk> also reported that many exhausted tropical birds were taken aboard the ship while in the eye . The ship had to maneuver in order to avoid hitting other ships in the area . Another boat with twelve people aboard capsized off a beach near Puerto Vallarta while weathering wind gusts of 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) from the hurricane . Nine aboard the ship were reported dead as a result , but four others were able to swim back to shore . 
 The hurricane was the worst to strike Puerto Vallarta in 20 years . 5 @,@ 000 people were evacuated due to the hurricane with an addition 500 people on vacation becoming stranded inside their hotels . At least 600 evacuees sought refuge in a customs house , with an additional 1000 more evacuating to an airport terminal . More evacuees sought shelter in schools and the city hall . Four major rivers , including the <unk> River , which flows into the city , overflowed their banks , inundating the city along with several neighboring communities . Some areas of downtown Puerto Vallarta were submerged in depths of up to 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) due to the flooding . Telephone lines in the city were suspended and highways were rendered impassable by the floods . One person died during a house collapse in the city and two others drowned . Another source reported five deaths from house collapses , although the post @-@ season report regards only three deaths in association with Lily in Mexico . The hurricane also passed over the nearby town of Barra de Navidad , where the residents took refuge inside the church of San Antonio . A local legend states that during the hurricane , the arms of Jesus Christ on the church 's crucifix broke and hung down . The moment the arms broke , the hurricane 's effects in the town stopped . The figure has since been known as the Christ of the Cyclone . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Relief efforts following the hurricane were mostly affected by the associated flooding . Trucks transporting food and medicine from the Jalisco state government were forced to turn back because of flooded roads . The army then decided on an aerial transport . This effort was hampered because , after three federal helicopters and Air Force planes touched down at the local airport , the road into the city was still flooded , meaning the aid could not be distributed . 
 Lily 's effects in Puerto Vallarta made it the second hurricane of the season to be declared the worst hurricane to strike a specific city in twenty or more years . The first was Hurricane Bridget , which struck Acapulco . Despite the damage , the name was not retired and was reused in 1975 , but due to a change in names lists in 1978 , the name Lily has not been used since . 
 = Fidel Castro = 
 Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz ( American Spanish : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ] audio ; born August 13 , 1926 ) , commonly known as Fidel Castro , is a Cuban politician and revolutionary who governed the Republic of Cuba as Prime Minister from 1959 to 1976 and then as President from 1976 to 2008 . Politically a Marxist – Leninist and Cuban nationalist , he also served as the First Secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba from 1961 until 2011 . Under his administration Cuba became a one @-@ party communist state ; industry and business were nationalized , and state socialist reforms implemented throughout society . 
 Born in Birán as the son of a wealthy farmer , Castro adopted leftist anti @-@ imperialist politics while studying law at the University of Havana . After participating in rebellions against right @-@ wing governments in the Dominican Republic and Colombia , he planned the overthrow of Cuban President Fulgencio Batista , launching a failed attack on the Moncada Barracks in 1953 . After a year 's imprisonment , he traveled to Mexico where he formed a revolutionary group , the 26th of July Movement , with his brother Raúl Castro and Che Guevara . Returning to Cuba , Castro took a key role in the Cuban Revolution by leading the Movement in a guerrilla war against Batista 's forces from the Sierra Maestra . After Batista 's overthrow in 1959 , Castro assumed military and political power as Cuba 's Prime Minister . The United States was alarmed by Castro 's friendly relations with the Soviet Union , and unsuccessfully attempted to remove him by assassination , economic blockade , and counter @-@ revolution , including the Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961 . Countering these threats , Castro formed an alliance with the Soviets and allowed them to place nuclear weapons on the island , sparking the Cuban Missile Crisis – a defining incident of the Cold War – in 1962 . 
 Adopting a Marxist @-@ Leninist model of development , Castro converted Cuba into a one @-@ party socialist state under Communist Party rule , the first in the Western hemisphere . Reforms introducing central economic planning and expanding healthcare and education were accompanied by state control of the press and the suppression of internal dissent . Abroad , Castro supported anti @-@ imperialist revolutionary groups , backing the establishment of Marxist governments in Chile , Nicaragua , and Grenada , and sending troops to aid allies in the Yom Kippur War , Ethio @-@ Somali War , and Angolan Civil War . These actions , coupled with Castro 's leadership of the Non @-@ Aligned Movement from 1979 – 83 and Cuba 's medical internationalism , increased Cuba 's profile on the world stage and earned its leader great respect in the developing world . Following the Soviet Union 's dissolution in 1991 , Castro led Cuba into its " Special Period " and embraced environmentalist and anti @-@ globalization ideas . In the 2000s he forged alliances in the Latin American Pink Tide – namely with Hugo Chávez 's Venezuela – and signed Cuba to the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas . In 2006 he transferred his responsibilities to Vice @-@ President Raúl Castro , who formally assumed the presidency in 2008 . 
 Castro is a controversial and divisive world figure . He is decorated with various international awards , and his supporters laud him as a champion of socialism , anti @-@ imperialism , and humanitarianism , whose revolutionary regime secured Cuba 's independence from American imperialism . Conversely , critics view him as a totalitarian dictator whose administration oversaw multiple human @-@ rights abuses , an exodus of more than one million Cubans , and the impoverishment of the country 's economy . Through his actions and his writings he has significantly influenced the politics of various individuals and groups across the world . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Youth : 1926 – 47 = = = 
 Castro was born out of wedlock at his father 's farm on August 13 , 1926 . His father , Ángel Castro y Argiz , was a migrant to Cuba from Galicia , Northwest Spain . He had become financially successful by growing sugar cane at Las <unk> farm in Birán , Oriente Province , and after the collapse of his first marriage , he took his household servant , Lina Ruz González - also of Spanish origin , as his mistress and later on second wife ; together they had seven children , among them Fidel . Aged six , Castro was sent to live with his teacher in Santiago de Cuba , before being baptized into the Roman Catholic Church aged eight . Being baptized enabled Castro to attend the La Salle boarding school in Santiago , where he regularly misbehaved , and so was sent to the privately funded , Jesuit @-@ run Dolores School in Santiago . In 1945 he transferred to the more prestigious Jesuit @-@ run El Colegio de Belén in Havana . Although Castro took an interest in history , geography and debating at Belén , he did not excel academically , instead devoting much of his time to playing sport . 
 In 1945 , Castro began studying law at the University of Havana . Admitting he was " politically illiterate " , he became embroiled in student activism , and the violent <unk> culture within the university . Passionate about anti @-@ imperialism and opposing U.S. intervention in the Caribbean , he unsuccessfully campaigned for the presidency of the Federation of University Students on a platform of " honesty , decency and justice " . Castro became critical of the corruption and violence of President Ramón Grau 's government , delivering a public speech on the subject in November 1946 that received coverage on the front page of several newspapers . 
 In 1947 , Castro joined the Party of the Cuban People ( Partido Ortodoxo ) , founded by veteran politician Eduardo Chibás . A charismatic figure , Chibás advocated social justice , honest government , and political freedom , while his party exposed corruption and demanded reform . Though Chibás lost the election , Castro remained committed to working on his behalf . Student violence escalated after Grau employed gang leaders as police officers , and Castro soon received a death threat urging him to leave the university ; refusing , he began carrying a gun and surrounding himself with armed friends . In later years anti @-@ Castro dissidents accused him of committing gang @-@ related assassinations at the time , but these remain unproven . 
 = = = Rebellion and Marxism : 1947 – 50 = = = 
 In June 1947 , Castro learned of a planned expedition to invade the Dominican Republic and overthrow the right @-@ wing military junta of Rafael Trujillo , a U.S. ally . Being President of the University Committee for Democracy in the Dominican Republic , Castro joined the expedition . The invasion force consisted of around 1 @,@ 200 troops , mostly Cubans and exiled Dominicans , and they intended to sail from Cuba in July 1947 . However , under U.S. pressure , Grau 's government stopped the invasion , although Castro and many of his comrades evaded arrest . Returning to Havana , Castro took a leading role in student protests against the killing of a high school pupil by government bodyguards . The protests , accompanied by a crackdown on those considered communists , led to violent clashes between activists and police in February 1948 , in which Castro was badly beaten . At this point his public speeches took on a distinctly leftist slant by condemning social and economic inequality in Cuba . In contrast , his former public criticisms had centered on condemning corruption and U.S. imperialism . 
 In April 1948 , Castro traveled to Bogotá , Colombia , with a Cuban student group sponsored by President Juan Perón 's Argentine government . There , the assassination of popular leftist leader Jorge Eliécer Gaitán Ayala led to widespread rioting and clashes between the governing Conservatives – backed by the army – and leftist Liberals . Castro joined the Liberal cause by stealing guns from a police station , but subsequent police investigations concluded that he had not been involved in any killings . Returning to Cuba , Castro became a prominent figure in protests against government attempts to raise bus fares . That year , he married Mirta Díaz Balart , a student from a wealthy family through whom he was exposed to the lifestyle of the Cuban elite . The relationship was a love match , disapproved of by both families , but Mirta 's father gave them tens of thousands of dollars to spend on a three @-@ month New York City honeymoon . 
 That same year , Grau decided not to stand for re @-@ election , which was instead won by his Partido Auténtico 's new candidate , Carlos Prío Socarrás . Prío faced widespread protests when members of the MSR , now allied to the police force , assassinated Justo Fuentes , a socialist friend of Castro 's . In response , Prío agreed to quell the gangs , but found them too powerful to control . Castro had moved further to the left , influenced by the Marxist writings of Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels , and Vladimir Lenin . He came to interpret Cuba 's problems as an integral part of capitalist society , or the " dictatorship of the bourgeoisie " , rather than the failings of corrupt politicians , and adopted the Marxist view that meaningful political change could only be brought about by proletariat revolution . Visiting Havana 's poorest neighborhoods , he became active in the student anti @-@ racist campaign . 
 In September 1949 , Mirta gave birth to a son , Fidelito , so the couple moved to a larger Havana flat . Castro continued to put himself at risk , staying active in the city ’ s politics and joining the September 30 Movement , which contained within it both communists and members of the Partido Ortodoxo . The group ’ s purpose was to oppose the influence of the violent gangs within the university ; despite his promises , Prío had failed to control the situation , instead offering many of their senior members jobs in government ministries . Castro volunteered to deliver a speech for the Movement on November 13 , exposing the government ’ s secret deals with the gangs and identifying key members . Attracting the attention of the national press , the speech angered the gangs , and Castro fled into hiding , first in the countryside and then in the U.S. Returning to Havana several weeks later , Castro lay low and focused on his university studies , graduating as a Doctor of Law in September 1950 . 
 = = = Career in law and politics : 1950 – 52 = = = 
 Castro co @-@ founded a legal partnership that primarily catered for poor Cubans , although it proved a financial failure . Caring little for money or material goods , Castro failed to pay his bills ; his furniture was repossessed and electricity cut off , distressing his wife . He took part in a high @-@ school protest in Cienfuegos in November 1950 , fighting with police in protest at the Education Ministry 's ban on student associations ; arrested and charged for violent conduct , the magistrate dismissed the charges . His hopes for Cuba still centered on Chibás and the Partido Ortodoxo , and he was present at Chibás ' politically motivated suicide in 1951 . Seeing himself as Chibás ' heir , Castro wanted to run for Congress in the June 1952 elections , though senior Ortodoxo members feared his radical reputation and refused to nominate him . Instead he was nominated as a candidate for the House of Representatives by party members in Havana 's poorest districts , and began campaigning . The Ortodoxo had considerable support and was predicted to do well in the election . 
 During his campaign , Castro met with General Fulgencio Batista , the former president who had returned to politics with the Unitary Action Party ; although both opposing Prío 's administration , their meeting never got beyond polite generalities . In March 1952 , Batista seized power in a military coup , with Prío fleeing to Mexico . Declaring himself president , Batista cancelled the planned presidential elections , describing his new system as " disciplined democracy " : Castro , like many others , considered it a one @-@ man dictatorship . Batista moved to the right , solidifying ties with both the wealthy elite and the United States , severing diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union , suppressing trade unions and persecuting Cuban socialist groups . Intent on opposing Batista , Castro brought several legal cases against the government , but these came to nothing , and Castro began thinking of alternate ways to oust the regime . 
 = = Cuban Revolution = = 
 = = = The Movement and the Moncada Barracks attack : 1952 – 53 = = = 
 Castro formed a group called " The Movement " which operated along a clandestine cell system , publishing underground newspaper El <unk> ( The Accuser ) , while arming and training anti @-@ Batista recruits . From July 1952 they went on a recruitment drive , gaining around 1 @,@ 200 members in a year , the majority from Havana 's poorer districts . Although a revolutionary socialist , Castro avoided an alliance with the communist PSP , fearing it would frighten away political moderates , but kept in contact with PSP members like his brother Raúl . Castro stockpiled weapons for a planned attack on the Moncada Barracks , a military garrison outside Santiago de Cuba , Oriente . Castro 's militants intended to dress in army uniforms and arrive at the base on July 25 , seizing control and raiding the armory before reinforcements arrived . Supplied with new weaponry , Castro intended to spark a revolution among Oriente 's impoverished cane cutters and promote further uprisings . Castro 's plan emulated those of the 19th century Cuban independence fighters who had raided Spanish barracks ; Castro saw himself as the heir to independence leader José Martí . 
 Castro gathered 165 revolutionaries for the mission , ordering his troops not to cause bloodshed unless they met armed resistance . The attack took place on July 26 , 1953 , but ran into trouble ; 3 of the 16 cars that had set out from Santiago failed to get there . Reaching the barracks , the alarm was raised , with most of the rebels pinned down by machine gun fire . 4 were killed before Castro ordered a retreat . The rebels suffered 6 fatalities and 15 other casualties , whilst the army suffered 19 dead and 27 wounded . Meanwhile , some rebels took over a civilian hospital ; subsequently stormed by government soldiers , the rebels were rounded up , tortured and 22 were executed without trial . Accompanied by 19 comrades , Castro set out for Gran Piedra in the rugged Sierra Maestra mountains several miles to the north , where they could establish a guerrilla base . Responding to the attack , Batista 's government proclaimed martial law , ordering a violent crackdown on dissent , and imposing strict media censorship . The government broadcast misinformation about the event , claiming that the rebels were communists who had killed hospital patients , although news and photographs of the army 's use of torture and summary executions in Oriente soon spread , causing widespread public and some governmental disapproval . 
 Over the following days , the rebels were rounded up ; some were executed and others – including Castro – transported to a prison north of Santiago . Believing Castro incapable of planning the attack alone , the government accused Ortodoxo and PSP politicians of involvement , putting 122 defendants on trial on September 21 at the Palace of Justice , Santiago . Acting as his own defense counsel , Castro cited Martí as the intellectual author of the attack and convinced the 3 judges to overrule the army 's decision to keep all defendants handcuffed in court , proceeding to argue that the charge with which they were accused – of " organizing an uprising of armed persons against the Constitutional Powers of the State " – was incorrect , for they had risen up against Batista , who had seized power in an unconstitutional manner . The trial embarrassed the army by revealing that they had tortured suspects , after which they tried unsuccessfully to prevent Castro from testifying any further , claiming he was too ill . The trial ended on October 5 , with the acquittal of most defendants ; 55 were sentenced to prison terms of between 7 months and 13 years . Castro was sentenced on October 16 , during which he delivered a speech that would be printed under the title of History Will Absolve Me . Castro was sentenced to 15 years imprisonment in the hospital wing of the Model Prison ( Presidio Modelo ) , a relatively comfortable and modern institution on the Isla de Pinos . 
 = = = Imprisonment and the 26th of July Movement : 1953 – 55 = = = 
 Imprisoned with 25 comrades , Castro renamed his group the " 26th of July Movement " ( MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 ) in memory of the Moncada attack 's date , and formed a school for prisoners . He read widely , enjoying the works of Marx , Lenin , and Martí but also reading books by Freud , Kant , Shakespeare , Munthe , Maugham and Dostoyevsky , analyzing them within a Marxist framework . Corresponding with supporters , he maintained control over the Movement and organized the publication of History Will Absolve Me . Initially permitted a relative amount of freedom within the prison , he was locked up in solitary confinement after inmates sang anti @-@ Batista songs on a visit by the President in February 1954 . Meanwhile , Castro 's wife Mirta gained employment in the Ministry of the Interior , something he discovered through a radio announcement . Appalled , he raged that he would rather die " a thousand times " than " suffer impotently from such an insult " . Both Fidel and Mirta initiated divorce proceedings , with Mirta taking custody of their son Fidelito ; this angered Castro , who did not want his son growing up in a bourgeois environment . 
 In 1954 , Batista 's government held presidential elections , but no politician stood against him ; the election was widely considered fraudulent . It had allowed some political opposition to be voiced , and Castro 's supporters had agitated for an amnesty for the Moncada incident 's perpetrators . Some politicians suggested an amnesty would be good publicity , and the Congress and Batista agreed . Backed by the U.S. and major corporations , Batista believed Castro to be no threat , and on May 15 , 1955 , the prisoners were released . Returning to Havana , Castro gave radio interviews and press conferences ; the government closely monitored him , curtailing his activities . Now divorced , Castro had sexual affairs with two female supporters , Naty Revuelta and Maria Laborde , each conceiving him a child . Setting about strengthening the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 , he established an 11 @-@ person National Directorate but retained autocratic control , with some dissenters labeling him a caudillo ( dictator ) ; he argued that a successful revolution could not be run by committee and required a strong leader . 
 In 1955 , bombings and violent demonstrations led to a crackdown on dissent , with Castro and Raúl fleeing the country to evade arrest . Castro sent a letter to the press , declaring that he was " leaving Cuba because all doors of peaceful struggle have been closed to me ... As a follower of Martí , I believe the hour has come to take our rights and not beg for them , to fight instead of pleading for them . " The Castros and several comrades traveled to Mexico , where Raúl befriended an Argentine doctor and Marxist @-@ Leninist named Ernesto " Che " Guevara . Fidel liked him , later describing him as " a more advanced revolutionary than I was . " Castro also associated with the Spaniard Alberto Bayo , who agreed to teach Castro 's rebels the necessary skills in guerrilla warfare . Requiring funding , Castro toured the U.S. in search of wealthy sympathizers , there being monitored by Batista 's agents , who allegedly orchestrated a failed assassination attempt against him . Castro kept in contact with the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 in Cuba , where they had gained a large support base in Oriente . Other militant anti @-@ Batista groups had sprung up , primarily from the student movement ; most notable was the <unk> Revolucionario <unk> ( DRE ) , founded by José Antonio Echevarría . Antonio met with Castro in Mexico City , but Castro opposed the student 's support for indiscriminate assassination . 
 After purchasing the decrepit yacht Granma , on November 25 , 1956 Castro set sail from Tuxpan , Veracruz , with 81 armed revolutionaries . The 1 @,@ 200 mile crossing to Cuba was harsh , with food running low and many suffering seasickness . At some points , they had to bail water caused by a leak , and at another , a man fell overboard , delaying their journey . The plan had been for the crossing to take 5 days , and on the Granma ’ s scheduled day of arrival , November 30 , MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 members under Frank Pais led an armed uprising in Santiago and Manzanillo . However , the Granma 's journey ultimately lasted 7 days , and with Castro and his men unable to provide reinforcements , Pais and his militants dispersed after two days of intermittent attacks . 
 = = = Guerrilla war : 1956 – 59 = = = 
 The Granma ran aground in a mangrove swamp at Playa Las <unk> , close to Los Cayuelos , on December 2 , 1956 . Fleeing inland , its crew headed for the forested mountain range of Oriente 's Sierra Maestra , being repeatedly attacked by Batista 's troops . Upon arrival , Castro discovered that only 19 rebels had made it to their destination , the rest having been killed or captured . Setting up an encampment , the survivors included the Castros , Che Guevara , and Camilo Cienfuegos . They began launching raids on small army posts to obtain weaponry , and in January 1957 they overran the outpost at La Plata , treating any soldiers that they wounded but executing <unk> Osorio , the local mayoral ( land company overseer ) , who was despised by the local peasants and who boasted of killing one of Castro 's rebels . Osorio 's execution aided the rebels in gaining the trust of locals , although they largely remained unenthusiastic and suspicious of the revolutionaries . As trust grew , some locals joined the rebels , although most new recruits came from urban areas . With volunteers boosting the rebel forces to over 200 , in July 1957 Castro divided his army into three columns , commanded by himself , his brother , and Guevara . The MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 members operating in urban areas continued agitation , sending supplies to Castro , and on February 16 , 1957 he met with other senior members to discuss tactics ; here he met Celia Sánchez , who would become a close friend . 
 Across Cuba , anti @-@ Batista groups carried out bombings and sabotage ; police responded with mass arrests , torture , and extrajudicial executions . In March 1957 , the DR launched a failed attack on the presidential palace , during which Antonio was shot dead . Frank País was also killed , leaving Castro the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 's unchallenged leader . Although Guevara and Raúl were well known for their Marxist @-@ Leninist views , Castro hid his , hoping to gain the support of less radical revolutionaries . In 1957 he met with leading members of the Partido Ortodoxo , Raúl Chibás and Felipe <unk> , authoring the Sierra Maestra Manifesto , in which they demanded that a provisional civilian government be set up to implement moderate agrarian reform , industrialization , and a literacy campaign before holding multiparty elections . As Cuba 's press was censored , Castro contacted foreign media to spread his message ; he became a celebrity after being interviewed by Herbert Matthews , a journalist from the New York Times . Reporters from CBS and Paris Match soon followed . 
 Castro 's guerrillas increased their attacks on military outposts , forcing the government to withdraw from the Sierra Maestra region , and by spring 1958 , the rebels controlled a hospital , schools , a printing press , slaughterhouse , land @-@ mine factory and a cigar @-@ making factory . By 1958 , Batista was under increasing pressure , a result of his military failures coupled with increasing domestic and foreign criticism surrounding his administration 's press censorship , torture , and extrajudicial executions . Influenced by anti @-@ Batista sentiment among their citizens , the U.S. government ceased supplying him with weaponry . The opposition called a general strike , accompanied by armed attacks from the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 . Beginning on April 9 , it received strong support in central and eastern Cuba , but little elsewhere . 
 Batista responded with an all @-@ out @-@ attack , Operation Verano , in which the army aerially bombarded forested areas and villages suspected of aiding the militants , while 10 @,@ 000 soldiers commanded by General Eulogio Cantillo surrounded the Sierra Maestra , driving north to the rebel encampments . Despite their numerical and technological superiority , the army had no experience with guerrilla warfare , and Castro halted their offensive using land mines and ambushes . Many of Batista 's soldiers defected to Castro 's rebels , who also benefited from local popular support . In the summer , the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 went on the offensive , pushing the army out of the mountains , with Castro using his columns in a pincer movement to surround the main army concentration in Santiago . By November , Castro 's forces controlled most of Oriente and Las Villas , and divided Cuba in two by closing major roads and rail lines , severely disadvantaging Batista . 
 Fearing Castro was a socialist , the U.S. instructed Cantillo to oust Batista . Cantillo secretly agreed to a ceasefire with Castro , promising that Batista would be tried as a war criminal , however Batista was warned , and fled into exile with over US $ 300 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 on December 31 , 1958 . Cantillo entered Havana 's Presidential Palace , proclaimed the Supreme Court judge Carlos Piedra to be President , and began appointing the new government . Furious , Castro ended the ceasefire , and ordered Cantillo 's arrest by sympathetic figures in the army . Accompanying celebrations at news of Batista 's downfall on January 1 , 1959 , Castro ordered the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 to prevent widespread looting and vandalism . Cienfuegos and Guevara led their columns into Havana on January 2 , while Castro entered Santiago and gave a speech invoking the wars of independence . Heading toward Havana , he greeted cheering crowds at every town , giving press conferences and interviews . 
 = = = Provisional government : 1959 = = = 
 At Castro 's command , the politically moderate lawyer Manuel Urrutia Lleó was proclaimed provisional president , with Castro erroneously announcing he had been selected by " popular election " ; most of Urrutia 's cabinet were MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 members . Entering Havana , Castro proclaimed himself Representative of the Rebel Armed Forces of the Presidency , setting up home and office in the penthouse of the Havana Hilton Hotel . Castro exercised a great deal of influence over Urrutia 's regime , which was now ruling by decree . He ensured that the government implemented policies to cut corruption and fight illiteracy and that it attempted to remove Batistanos from positions of power by dismissing Congress and barring all those elected in the rigged elections of 1954 and 1958 from future office . He then pushed Urrutia to issue a temporary ban on political parties ; he repeatedly said that they would eventually hold multiparty elections . Although repeatedly denying that he was a communist to the press , he began clandestinely meeting members of the Popular Socialist Party to discuss the creation of a socialist state . 
 In suppressing the revolution , Batista 's government had killed thousands of Cubans ; at the time , Castro and influential sectors of the press put the death toll at 20 @,@ 000 , although more recent estimates place it between 1000 and 4000 . In response to popular uproar , which demanded that those responsible be brought to justice , Castro helped set up many trials , resulting in hundreds of executions . Although widely popular domestically , critics – in particular the U.S. press – argued that many were not fair trials . Castro responded that " revolutionary justice is not based on legal precepts , but on moral conviction " . Acclaimed by many across Latin America , he traveled to Venezuela where he met with President @-@ elect Rómulo Betancourt , unsuccessfully requesting a loan and a new deal for Venezuelan oil . Returning home , an argument between Castro and senior government figures broke out . He was infuriated that the government had left thousands unemployed by closing down casinos and brothels . As a result , Prime Minister José Miró Cardona resigned , going into exile in the U.S. and joining the anti @-@ Castro movement . 
 = = Premiership = = 
 = = = Consolidating leadership : 1959 – 60 = = = 
 On February 16 , 1959 , Castro was sworn in as Prime Minister of Cuba . In April he visited the U.S. on a charm offensive where he met Vice President Richard Nixon , whom he instantly disliked . Proceeding to Canada , Trinidad , Brazil , Uruguay and Argentina , Castro attended an economic conference in Buenos Aires , unsuccessfully proposing a $ 30 billion U.S.-funded " Marshall Plan " for Latin America . In May 1959 Castro signed into law the First Agrarian Reform , setting a cap for landholdings to 993 acres ( 402 ha ) per owner and prohibiting foreigners from obtaining Cuban land ownership . Around 200 @,@ 000 peasants received title deeds as large land holdings were broken up ; popular among the working class , it alienated the richer landowners . Castro appointed himself president of the National Tourist Industry , introducing unsuccessful measures to encourage African @-@ American tourists to visit , advertising Cuba as a tropical paradise free of racial discrimination . Judges and politicians had their pay reduced while low @-@ level civil servants saw theirs raised , and in March 1959 , Castro declared rents for those who paid less than $ 100 a month halved . 
 Although refusing to categorize his regime as socialist and repeatedly denying being a communist , Castro appointed Marxists to senior government and military positions . Most notably , Che Guevara became Governor of the Central Bank and then Minister of Industries . Appalled , Air Force commander Pedro Luis Díaz Lanz defected to the U.S. Although President Urrutia denounced the defection , he expressed concern with the rising influence of Marxism . Angered , Castro in turn announced his resignation as Prime Minister , blaming Urrutia for complicating government with his " fevered anti @-@ Communism " . Over 500 @,@ 000 Castro @-@ supporters surrounded the Presidential Palace demanding Urrutia 's resignation , which he submitted . On July 23 , Castro resumed his Premiership and appointed Marxist Osvaldo Dorticós as President . 
 Castro 's government emphasised social projects to improve Cuba 's standard of living , often to the detriment of economic development . Major emphasis was placed on education , and during the first 30 months of Castro 's government , more classrooms were opened than in the previous 30 years . The Cuban primary education system offered a work @-@ study program , with half of the time spent in the classroom , and the other half in a productive activity . Health care was nationalized and expanded , with rural health centers and urban polyclinics opening up across the island to offer free medical aid . Universal vaccination against childhood diseases was implemented , and infant mortality rates were reduced dramatically . A third part of this social program was the improvement of infrastructure . Within the first six months of Castro 's government , 600 miles of roads were built across the island , while $ 300 million was spent on water and sanitation projects . Over 800 houses were constructed every month in the early years of the administration in an effort to cut homelessness , while nurseries and day @-@ care centers were opened for children and other centers opened for the disabled and elderly . 
 Castro used radio and television to develop a " dialogue with the people " , posing questions and making provocative statements . His regime remained popular with workers , peasants , and students , who constituted the majority of the country 's population , while opposition came primarily from the middle class ; thousands of doctors , engineers and other professionals emigrated to Florida in the U.S. , causing an economic brain drain . Productivity decreased and the country 's financial reserves were drained within two years . After conservative press expressed hostility towards the government , the pro @-@ Castro printers ' trade union disrupted editorial staff , and in January 1960 the government ordered them to publish a " clarification " written by the printers ' union at the end of articles critical of the government . Castro 's government arrested hundreds of counter @-@ revolutionaries , many of whom were subjected to solitary confinement , rough treatment , and threatening behavior . Militant anti @-@ Castro groups , funded by exiles , the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) , and the Dominican government , undertook armed attacks and set up guerrilla bases in Cuba 's mountains , leading to the six @-@ year War against the Bandits . 
 By 1960 , the Cold War raged between two superpowers : the United States , a capitalist liberal democracy , and the Soviet Union ( USSR ) , a Marxist @-@ Leninist socialist state ruled by the Communist Party . Expressing contempt for the U.S. , Castro shared the ideological views of the USSR , establishing relations with several Marxist @-@ Leninist states . Meeting with Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan , Castro agreed to provide the USSR with sugar , fruit , fibers , and hides , in return for crude oil , fertilizers , industrial goods , and a $ 100 million loan . Cuba 's government ordered the country 's refineries – then controlled by the U.S. corporations Shell , Esso and Standard Oil – to process Soviet oil , but under U.S. pressure , they refused . Castro responded by expropriating and nationalizing the refineries . <unk> , the U.S. cancelled its import of Cuban sugar , provoking Castro to nationalize most U.S.-owned assets on the island , including banks and sugar mills . 
 Relations between Cuba and the U.S. were further strained following the explosion of a French vessel , the Le <unk> , in Havana harbor in March 1960 . The ship carried weapons purchased from Belgium , the cause of the explosion was never determined , but Castro publicly insinuated that the U.S. government were guilty of sabotage . He ended this speech with " ¡ Patria o Muerte ! " ( " Fatherland or Death " ) , a proclamation that he made much use of in ensuing years . Inspired by their earlier success with the 1954 Guatemalan coup d 'état , in March 1960 , U.S. President Eisenhower authorized the CIA to overthrow Castro 's government . He provided them with a budget of $ 13 million and permitted them to ally with the Mafia , who were aggrieved that Castro 's government closed down their brothel and casino businesses in Cuba . On October 13 , 1960 , the U.S. prohibited the majority of exports to Cuba , initiating an economic embargo . In retaliation , the National Institute for Agrarian Reform INRA took control of 383 private @-@ run businesses on October 14 , and on October 25 a further 166 U.S. companies operating in Cuba had their premises seized and nationalized . On December 16 , the U.S. ended its import quota of Cuban sugar , the country 's primary export . 
 In September 1960 , Castro flew to New York City for the General Assembly of the United Nations . Staying at the Hotel Theresa in Harlem , he met with journalists and anti @-@ establishment figures like Malcolm X. He also met Soviet Premier Nikita Khruschev , with the two publicly condemning the poverty and racism faced by Americans in areas like Harlem . Relations between Castro and Khrushchev were warm ; they led the applause to one another 's speeches at the General Assembly . Subsequently visited by Polish First Secretary Władysław Gomułka , Bulgarian Chairman Todor Zhivkov , Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser and Indian Premier Jawaharlal Nehru , Castro also received an evening 's reception from the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . 
 Back in Cuba , Castro feared a U.S.-backed coup ; in 1959 his regime spent $ 120 million on Soviet , French , and Belgian weaponry and by early 1960 had doubled the size of Cuba 's armed forces . Fearing counter @-@ revolutionary elements in the army , the government created a People 's Militia to arm citizens favorable to the revolution , training at least 50 @,@ 000 civilians in combat techniques . In September 1960 , they created the Committees for the Defense of the Revolution ( CDR ) , a nationwide civilian organization which implemented neighborhood spying to detect counter @-@ revolutionary activities as well as organizing health and education campaigns , becoming a conduit for public complaints . By 1970 , a third of the population would be involved in the CDR , and this would come to rise to 80 % . Castro proclaimed the new administration a direct democracy , in which Cubans could assemble at demonstrations to express their democratic will . As a result , he rejected the need for elections , claiming that representative democratic systems served the interests of socio @-@ economic elites . U.S. Secretary of State Christian Herter announced that Cuba was adopting the Soviet model of rule , with a one @-@ party state , government control of trade unions , suppression of civil liberties , and the absence of freedom of speech and press . 
 = = = Bay of Pigs Invasion and " Socialist Cuba " : 1961 – 62 = = = 
 In January 1961 , Castro ordered Havana 's U.S. Embassy to reduce its 300 staff , suspecting many to be spies . The U.S. responded by ending diplomatic relations , and increasing CIA funding for exiled dissidents ; these militants began attacking ships trading with Cuba , and bombed factories , shops , and sugar mills . Both Eisenhower and his successor John F. Kennedy supported a CIA plan to aid a dissident militia , the Democratic Revolutionary Front , to invade Cuba and overthrow Castro ; the plan resulted in the Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961 . On April 15 , CIA @-@ supplied B @-@ 26 's bombed 3 Cuban military airfields ; the U.S. announced that the perpetrators were defecting Cuban air force pilots , but Castro exposed these claims as false flag misinformation . Fearing invasion , he ordered the arrest of between 20 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 suspected counter @-@ revolutionaries , publicly proclaiming that " What the imperialists cannot forgive us , is that we have made a Socialist revolution under their noses " , his first announcement that the government was socialist . 
 The CIA and Democratic Revolutionary Front had based a 1 @,@ 400 @-@ strong army , Brigade 2506 , in Nicaragua . In the night from April 16 to 17 , Brigade 2506 landed along Cuba 's Bay of Pigs , and engaged in a firefight with a local revolutionary militia . Castro ordered Captain José Ramón Fernández to launch the counter @-@ offensive , before taking personal control himself . After bombing the invaders ' ships and bringing in reinforcements , Castro forced the Brigade 's surrender on April 20 . He ordered the 1189 captured rebels to be interrogated by a panel of journalists on live television , personally taking over questioning on April 25 . 14 were put on trial for crimes allegedly committed before the revolution , while the others were returned to the U.S. in exchange for medicine and food valued at U.S. $ 25 million . Castro 's victory was a powerful symbol across Latin America , but it also increased internal opposition primarily among the middle @-@ class Cubans who had been detained in the run @-@ up to the invasion . Although most were freed within a few days , many fled to the U.S. , establishing themselves in Florida . 
 Consolidating " Socialist Cuba " , Castro united the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 , Popular Socialist Party and Revolutionary Directorate into a governing party based on the Leninist principle of democratic centralism : the Integrated Revolutionary Organizations ( <unk> <unk> <unk> - ORI ) , renamed the United Party of the Cuban Socialist Revolution ( <unk> ) in 1962 . Although the USSR was hesitant regarding Castro 's embrace of socialism , relations with the Soviets deepened . Castro sent Fidelito for a Moscow schooling , Soviet technicians arrived on the island , and Castro was awarded the Lenin Peace Prize . In December 1961 , Castro admitted that he had been a Marxist @-@ Leninist for years , and in his Second Declaration of Havana he called on Latin America to rise up in revolution . In response , the U.S. successfully pushed the Organization of American States to expel Cuba ; the Soviets privately reprimanded Castro for recklessness , although he received praise from China . Despite their ideological affinity with China , in the Sino @-@ Soviet Split , Cuba allied with the wealthier Soviets , who offered economic and military aid . 
 The ORI began shaping Cuba using the Soviet model , persecuting political opponents and perceived social deviants such as prostitutes and homosexuals ; Castro considered same @-@ sex sexual activity a bourgeois trait . Gay men were forced into the Military Units to Aid Production ( <unk> <unk> de <unk> a la <unk> - <unk> ) ; after many revolutionary intellectuals decried this move , the <unk> camps were closed in 1967 , although gay men continued to be imprisoned . In 2010 , Castro took responsibility for this persecution , regretting it as a " great injustice " . By 1962 , Cuba 's economy was in steep decline , a result of poor economic management and low productivity coupled with the U.S. trade embargo . Food shortages led to rationing , resulting in protests in Cárdenas . Security reports indicated that many Cubans associated austerity with the " Old Communists " of the PSP , while Castro considered a number of them – namely Aníbal Escalante and Blas Roca – unduly loyal to Moscow . In March 1962 Castro removed the most prominent " Old Communists " from office , labelling them " sectarian " . On a personal level , Castro was increasingly lonely , and his relations with Guevara became strained as the latter became increasingly anti @-@ Soviet and pro @-@ Chinese . 
 = = = Cuban Missile Crisis and furthering socialism : 1962 – 68 = = = 
 Militarily weaker than NATO , Khrushchev wanted to install Soviet R @-@ 12 <unk> nuclear missiles on Cuba to even the power balance . Although conflicted , Castro agreed , believing it would guarantee Cuba 's safety and enhance the cause of socialism . Undertaken in secrecy , only the Castro brothers , Guevara , Dorticós and security chief Ramiro Valdés knew the full plan . Upon discovering it through aerial reconnaissance , in October the U.S. implemented an island @-@ wide quarantine to search vessels headed to Cuba , sparking the Cuban Missile Crisis . The U.S. saw the missiles as offensive ; Castro insisted they were for defense only . Castro urged Khrushchev to threaten a nuclear strike on the U.S. should Cuba be attacked , but Khrushchev was desperate to avoid nuclear war . Castro was left out of the negotiations , in which Khruschev agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for a U.S. commitment not to invade Cuba and an understanding that the U.S. would remove their <unk> from Turkey and Italy . Feeling betrayed by Khruschev , Castro was furious and soon fell ill . Proposing a five @-@ point plan , Castro demanded that the U.S. end its embargo , withdraw from Guantanamo Bay Naval Base , cease supporting dissidents , and stop violating Cuban air space and territorial waters . Presenting these demands to U Thant , visiting Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations , the U.S. ignored them , and in turn Castro refused to allow the U.N. ' s inspection team into Cuba . 
 In May 1963 , Castro visited the USSR at Khrushchev 's personal invitation , touring 14 cities , addressing a Red Square rally , and being awarded both the Order of Lenin and an honorary doctorate from Moscow State University . While there Castro was permitted to sign a Soviet R @-@ 16 intercontinental ballistic missile . Castro returned to Cuba with new ideas ; inspired by Soviet newspaper Pravda , he amalgamated Hoy and Revolución into a new daily , Granma , and oversaw large investment into Cuban sport that resulted in an increased international sporting reputation . Seeking to further consolidate control , in 1963 the government cracked down on Protestant sects in Cuba , with Castro labeling them counter @-@ revolutionary " instruments of imperialism " ; many preachers were found guilty of illegal <unk> and imprisoned . Measures were implemented to force perceived idle and delinquent youths to work , primarily through the introduction of mandatory military service , while in September the government temporarily permitted emigration for anyone other than males aged between 15 and 26 , thereby ridding the government of thousands of critics , most of whom were from upper and middle @-@ class backgrounds . In 1963 Castro 's mother died . This was the last time his private life was reported in Cuba 's press . In January 1964 , Castro returned to Moscow , officially to sign a new five @-@ year sugar trade agreement , but also to discuss the ramifications of the assassination of John F. Kennedy ; Castro had been deeply concerned by the assassination , believing that a far right conspiracy was behind it but that the Cubans would be blamed . In October 1965 , the Integrated Revolutionary Organizations was officially renamed the " Cuban Communist Party " and published the membership of its Central Committee . 
 Despite Soviet misgivings , Castro continued calling for global revolution , funding militant leftists and those engaged in national liberation struggles . Cuba 's foreign policy was staunchly anti @-@ imperialist , believing that every nation should control its own natural resources . He supported Che Guevara 's " Andean project " , an unsuccessful plan to set up a guerrilla movement in the highlands of Bolivia , Peru and Argentina , and allowed revolutionary groups from across the world , from the Viet Cong to the Black Panthers , to train in Cuba . He considered Western @-@ dominated Africa ripe for revolution , and sent troops and medics to aid Ahmed Ben Bella 's socialist regime in Algeria during the Sand war . He also allied with Alphonse <unk> @-@ <unk> 's socialist government in Congo @-@ Brazzaville , and in 1965 Castro authorized Guevara to travel to Congo @-@ Kinshasa to train revolutionaries against the Western @-@ backed government . Castro was personally devastated when Guevara was subsequently killed by CIA @-@ backed troops in Bolivia in October 1967 and publicly attributed it to Che 's disregard for his own safety . In 1966 Castro staged a Tri @-@ Continental Conference of Africa , Asia and Latin America in Havana , further establishing himself as a significant player on the world stage . From this conference , Castro created the Latin American Solidarity Organization ( <unk> ) , which adopted the slogan of " The duty of a revolution is to make revolution " , signifying Havana 's leadership of Latin America 's revolutionary movement . 
 Castro 's increasing role on the world stage strained his relationship with the USSR , now under the leadership of Leonid Brezhnev . Asserting Cuba 's independence , Castro refused to sign the Treaty on the Non @-@ Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons , declaring it a Soviet @-@ U.S. attempt to dominate the Third World . Diverting from Soviet Marxist doctrine , he suggested that Cuban society could evolve straight to pure communism rather than progressing through various stages of socialism . In turn , Soviet @-@ loyalist Aníbal Escalante began organizing a government network of opposition to Castro , though in January 1968 , he and his supporters were arrested for allegedly passing state secrets to Moscow . However , recognising Cuba 's economic dependence on the Soviets , Castro relented to Brezhnev 's pressure to be obedient , and in August 1968 denounced the leaders of the Prague Spring and praised the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia . Influenced by China 's Great Leap Forward , in 1968 Castro proclaimed a Great Revolutionary Offensive , closing all remaining privately owned shops and businesses and denouncing their owners as capitalist counter @-@ revolutionaries . The severe lack of consumer goods for purchase led productivity to decline , as large sectors of the population felt little incentive to work hard . This was exacerbated by the perception that a revolutionary elite had emerged consisting of those connected to the administration ; they had access to better housing , private transportation , servants , and the ability to purchase luxury goods abroad . 
 = = = Economic stagnation and Third World politics : 1969 – 74 = = = 
 Castro publicly celebrated his administration 's 10th anniversary in January 1969 ; in his celebratory speech he warned of sugar rations , reflecting the nation 's economic problems . The 1969 crop was heavily damaged by a hurricane , and to meet its export quota , the government drafted in the army , implemented a seven @-@ day working week , and postponed public holidays to lengthen the harvest . When that year 's production quota was not met , Castro offered to resign during a public speech , but assembled crowds insisted he remain . Despite the economic issues , many of Castro 's social reforms were popular , with the population largely supportive of the " Achievements of the Revolution " in education , medical care , housing , and road construction , as well as the policies of " direct democratic " public consultation . Seeking Soviet help , from 1970 to 1972 Soviet economists re @-@ organized Cuba 's economy , founding the Cuban @-@ Soviet Commission of Economic , Scientific and Technical Collaboration , while Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin visited in 1971 . In July 1972 , Cuba joined the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance ( Comecon ) , an economic organization of socialist states , although this further limited Cuba 's economy to agricultural production . 
 In May 1970 , the crews of two Cuban fishing boats were kidnapped by Florida @-@ based dissident group Alpha 66 , who demanded that Cuba release imprisoned militants . Under U.S. pressure , the hostages were released , and Castro welcomed them back as heroes . In April 1971 , Castro was internationally condemned for ordering the arrest of dissident poet Heberto Padilla ; Padilla was freed , but the government established the National Cultural Council to ensure that intellectuals and artists supported the administration . 
 In 1971 , he visited Chile , where Marxist President Salvador Allende had been elected as the head of a left @-@ wing coalition . Castro supported Allende 's socialist reforms , but warned him of right @-@ wing elements in Chile 's military . In 1973 , the military led a coup d 'état and established a military junta led by Augusto Pinochet . Castro proceeded to Guinea to meet socialist President Sékou Touré , praising him as Africa 's greatest leader , and there received the Order of Fidelity to the People . He then went on a seven @-@ week tour visiting leftist allies : Algeria , Bulgaria , Hungary , Poland , East Germany , Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union , where he was given further awards . On each trip , he was eager to visit factory and farm workers , publicly praising their governments ; privately , he urged the regimes to aid revolutionary movements elsewhere , particularly those fighting the Vietnam War . 
 In September 1973 , he returned to Algiers to attend the Fourth Summit of the Non @-@ Aligned Movement ( NAM ) . Various NAM members were critical of Castro 's attendance , claiming that Cuba was aligned to the Warsaw Pact and therefore should not be at the conference . At the conference he publicly broke off relations with Israel , citing its government 's close relationship with the U.S. and its treatment of Palestinians during the Israel @-@ Palestine conflict . This earned Castro respect throughout the Arab world , in particular from the Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi , who became his friend and ally . As the Yom Kippur War broke out in October 1973 between Israel and an Arab coalition led by Egypt and Syria , Cuba sent 4 @,@ 000 troops to defend Syrian territory from Israeli incursions . Leaving Algiers , Castro visited Iraq and North Vietnam . 
 Cuba 's economy grew in 1974 as a result of high international sugar prices and new credits with Argentina , Canada , and parts of Western Europe . A number of Latin American states called for Cuba 's re @-@ admittance into the Organization of American States ( OAS ) , with the U.S. finally conceding in 1975 on Henry Kissinger 's advice . Cuba 's government underwent a restructuring along Soviet lines , claiming that this would further democratization and decentralize power away from Castro . Officially announcing Cuba 's identity as a socialist state , the first National Congress of the Cuban Communist Party was held , and a new constitution adopted that abolished the position of President and Prime Minister . Castro remained the dominant figure in governance , taking the presidency of the newly created Council of State and Council of Ministers , making him both head of state and head of government . 
 = = Presidency = = 
 = = = Foreign wars and NAM Presidency : 1975 – 79 = = = 
 Castro considered Africa to be " the weakest link in the imperialist chain " , and at the request of Angolan President Agostinho Neto he ordered 230 military advisers into Southern Africa in November 1975 to aid Neto 's Marxist MPLA in the Angolan Civil War . When the U.S. and South Africa stepped up their support of the opposition <unk> and UNITA , Castro ordered a further 18 @,@ 000 troops to Angola , which played a major role in forcing a South African retreat . Traveling to Angola , Castro celebrated with Neto , Sékou Touré and Guinea @-@ <unk> President Luís Cabral , where they agreed to support Mozambique 's Marxist @-@ Leninist government against <unk> in the Mozambique Civil War . In February , Castro visited Algeria and then Libya , where he spent ten days with Gaddafi and oversaw the establishment of the <unk> system of governance , before attending talks with the Marxist government of South Yemen . From there he proceeded to Somalia , Tanzania , Mozambique and Angola where he was greeted by crowds as a hero for Cuba 's role in opposing apartheid South Africa . Throughout much of Africa he was hailed as a friend to national liberation from foreign dominance . This was followed with visits to Berlin and Moscow . 
 In 1977 the Ethio @-@ Somali War broke out over the disputed Ogaden region as Somalia invaded Ethiopia ; although a former ally of Somali President Siad Barre , Castro had warned him against such action , and Cuba sided with Mengistu Haile Mariam 's Marxist government of Ethiopia . He sent troops under the command of General Arnaldo Ochoa to aid the overwhelmed Ethiopian army . After forcing back the Somalis , Mengistu then ordered the Ethiopians to suppress the Eritrean People 's Liberation Front , a measure Castro refused to support . Castro extended support to Latin American revolutionary movements , namely the Sandinista National Liberation Front in its overthrow of the Nicaraguan rightist government of Anastasio Somoza Debayle in July 1979 . Castro 's critics accused the government of wasting Cuban lives in these military endeavors ; the anti @-@ Castro Center for a Free Cuba has claimed that an estimated 14 @,@ 000 Cubans were killed in foreign Cuban military actions . When U.S. state critics claimed that Castro had no right to interfere in these nations , he highlighted that Cuba had been invited into them , pointing out the U.S. ' own involvement in various foreign nations . 
 In 1979 , the Conference of the Non @-@ Aligned Movement ( NAM ) was held in Havana , where Castro was selected as NAM president , a position he held till 1982 . In his capacity as both President of the NAM and of Cuba he appeared at the United Nations General Assembly in October 1979 and gave a speech on the disparity between the world 's rich and poor . His speech was greeted with much applause from other world leaders , though his standing in NAM was damaged by Cuba 's abstinence from the U.N. ' s General Assembly condemnation of the Soviet war in Afghanistan . Cuba 's relations across North America improved under Mexican President Luis Echeverría , Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau , and U.S. President Jimmy Carter . Carter continued criticizing Cuba 's human rights abuses , but adopted a respectful approach which gained Castro 's attention . Considering Carter well @-@ meaning and sincere , Castro freed certain political prisoners and allowed some Cuban exiles to visit relatives on the island , hoping that in turn Carter would abolish the economic embargo and stop CIA support for militant dissidents . Conversely , his relationship with China declined , as he accused Deng Xiaoping 's Chinese government of betraying their revolutionary principles by initiating trade links with the U.S. and attacking Vietnam . 
 = = = Reagan and Gorbachev : 1980 – 89 = = = 
 By the 1980s , Cuba 's economy was again in trouble , following a decline in the market price of sugar and 1979 's decimated harvest . For the first time , unemployment became a serious problem in Castro 's Cuba , with the government sending unemployed youth to other countries , primarily East Germany , to work there . Desperate for money , Cuba 's government secretly sold off paintings from national collections and illicitly traded for U.S. electronic goods through Panama . Increasing numbers of Cubans fled to Florida , but were labelled " scum " and " lumpen " by Castro and his CDR supporters . In one incident , 10 @,@ 000 Cubans stormed the Peruvian Embassy requesting asylum , and so the U.S. agreed that it would accept 3 @,@ 500 refugees . Castro conceded that those who wanted to leave could do so from Mariel port . Hundreds of boats arrived from the U.S. , leading to a mass exodus of 120 @,@ 000 ; Castro 's government took advantage of the situation by loading criminals , the mentally ill , and suspected homosexuals onto the boats destined for Florida . The event destabilized Carter 's administration and in 1981 the right @-@ wing Ronald Reagan was elected U.S. President . Reagan 's administration adopted a hard @-@ line approach against Castro , making its desire to overthrow his regime clear . In late 1981 , Castro publicly accused the U.S. of biological warfare against Cuba by orchestrating a dengue fever epidemic . 
 Although despising Argentina 's right wing military junta , Castro supported them in the 1982 Falklands War against Britain and offered military aid to the Argentinians . Castro supported the leftist New Jewel Movement that seized power in Grenada in 1979 , befriending <unk> President Maurice Bishop and sending doctors , teachers , and technicians to aid the country 's development . When Bishop was executed in a Soviet @-@ backed coup by hard @-@ line Marxist Bernard <unk> in October 1983 , Castro condemned the killing but cautiously retained support for Grenada 's government . However , the U.S. used the coup as a basis for invading the island . Cuban soldiers died in the conflict , with Castro denouncing the invasion and comparing the U.S. to Nazi Germany . In a July 1983 speech marking the 30th anniversary of the Cuban Revolution , Castro condemned Reagan 's administration as a " reactionary , extremist clique " who were waging an " openly warmongering and fascist foreign policy " . Castro feared a U.S. invasion of Nicaragua and sent Ochoa to train the governing Sandinistas in guerrilla warfare , but received little support from the USSR . 
 In 1985 , Mikhail Gorbachev became Secretary @-@ General of the Soviet Communist Party . A reformer , he implemented measures to increase freedom of the press ( glasnost ) and economic decentralization ( perestroika ) in an attempt to strengthen socialism . Like many orthodox Marxist critics , Castro feared that the reforms would weaken the socialist state and allow capitalist elements to regain control . Gorbachev conceded to U.S. demands to reduce support for Cuba , with Soviet @-@ Cuban relations deteriorating . When Gorbachev visited Cuba in April 1989 , he informed Castro that perestroika meant an end to subsidies for Cuba . Ignoring calls for liberalization in accordance with the Soviet example , Castro continued to clamp down on internal dissidents and in particular kept tabs on the military , the primary threat to the government . A number of senior military officers , including Ochoa and Tony de la Guardia , were investigated for corruption and complicity in cocaine smuggling , tried , and executed in 1989 , despite calls for leniency . On medical advice given him in October 1985 , Castro gave up regularly smoking Cuban cigars , helping to set an example for the rest of the populace . Castro became passionate in his denunciation of the Third World debt problem , arguing that the Third World would never escape the debt that First World banks and governments imposed upon it . In 1985 , Havana hosted five international conferences on the world debt problem . 
 By November 1987 , Castro began spending more time on the Angolan Civil War , in which the Marxists had fallen into retreat . Angolan President José Eduardo dos Santos successfully appealed for more Cuban troops , with Castro later admitting that he devoted more time to Angola than to the domestic situation , believing that a victory would lead to the collapse of apartheid . Gorbachev called for a negotiated end to the conflict and in 1988 organized a quadripartite talks between the USSR , U.S. , Cuba and South Africa ; they agreed that all foreign troops would pull out of Angola . Castro was angered by Gorbachev 's approach , believing that he was abandoning the plight of the world 's poor in favor of détente . 
 In Eastern Europe , socialist governments fell to capitalist reformers between 1989 and 1991 and many Western observers expected the same in Cuba . Increasingly isolated , Cuba improved relations with Manuel Noriega 's right @-@ wing government in Panama – despite Castro 's personal hatred of Noriega – but it was overthrown in a U.S. invasion in December 1989 . In February 1990 , Castro 's allies in Nicaragua , President Daniel Ortega and the Sandinistas , were defeated by the U.S.-funded National Opposition Union in an election . With the collapse of the Soviet bloc , the U.S. secured a majority vote for a resolution condemning Cuba 's human rights violations at the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva , Switzerland . Cuba asserted that this was a manifestation of U.S. hegemony , and refused to allow an investigative delegation to enter the country . 
 = = = Special Period : 1990 – 2000 = = = 
 With favourable trade from the Soviet bloc ended , Castro publicly declared that Cuba was entering a " Special Period in Time of Peace . " Petrol rations were dramatically reduced , Chinese bicycles were imported to replace cars , and factories performing non @-@ essential tasks were shut down . Oxen began to replace tractors , firewood began being used for cooking and electricity cuts were introduced that lasted 16 hours a day . Castro admitted that Cuba faced the worst situation short of open war , and that the country might have to resort to subsistence farming . By 1992 , Cuba 's economy had declined by over 40 % in under two years , with major food shortages , widespread malnutrition and a lack of basic goods . Castro hoped for a restoration of Marxism @-@ Leninism in the USSR , but refrained from backing the 1991 coup in that country . When Gorbachev regained control , Cuba @-@ Soviet relations deteriorated further and Soviet troops were withdrawn in September 1991 . In December , the Soviet Union was officially dismantled as Boris Yeltsin abolished the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and introducing a capitalist multiparty democracy . Yeltsin despised Castro and developed links with the Miami @-@ based Cuban American National Foundation . Castro tried improving relations with the capitalist nations . He welcomed Western politicians and investors to Cuba , befriended Manuel <unk> and took a particular interest in Margaret Thatcher 's policies in the UK , believing that Cuban socialism could learn from her emphasis on low taxation and personal initiative . He ceased support for foreign militants , refrained from praising FARC on a 1994 visit to Colombia and called for a negotiated settlement between the Zapatistas and Mexican government in 1995 . Publicly , he presented himself as a moderate on the world stage . 
 In 1991 , Havana hosted the Pan @-@ American Games , which involved construction of a stadium and accommodation for the athletes ; Castro admitted that it was an expensive error , but it was a success for Cuba 's government . Crowds regularly shouted " Fidel ! Fidel ! " in front of foreign journalists , while Cuba became the first Latin American nation to beat the U.S. to the top of the gold @-@ medal table . Support for Castro remained strong , and although there were small anti @-@ government demonstrations , the Cuban opposition rejected the exile community 's calls for an armed uprising . In August 1994 , Havana witnessed the largest anti @-@ Castro demonstration in Cuban history , as 200 to 300 young men threw stones at police , demanding that they be allowed to emigrate to Miami . A larger pro @-@ Castro crowd confronted them , who were joined by Castro ; he informed media that the men were anti @-@ socials misled by the U.S. The protests dispersed with no recorded injuries . Fearing that dissident groups would invade , the government organised the " War of All the People " defense strategy , planning a widespread guerrilla warfare campaign , and the unemployed were given jobs building a network of bunkers and tunnels across the country . 
 Castro believed in the need for reform if Cuban socialism was to survive in a world now dominated by capitalist free markets . In October 1991 , the Fourth Congress of the Cuban Communist Party was held in Santiago , at which a number of important changes to the government were announced . Castro would step down as head of government , to be replaced by the much younger Carlos Lage , although Castro would remain the head of the Communist Party and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the armed forces . Many older members of government were to be retired and replaced by their younger counterparts . A number of economic changes were proposed , and subsequently put to a national referendum . Free farmers ' markets and small @-@ scale private enterprises would be legalized in an attempt to stimulate economic growth , while U.S. dollars were also made legal tender . Certain restrictions on emigration were eased , allowing more discontented Cuban citizens to move to the United States . Further democratization was to be brought in by having the National Assembly 's members elected directly by the people , rather than through municipal and provincial assemblies . Castro welcomed debate between proponents and opponents of the reforms , although over time he began to increasingly sympathise with the opponent 's positions , arguing that such reforms must be delayed . 
 Castro 's government diversified its economy into biotechnology and tourism , the latter outstripping Cuba 's sugar industry as its primary source of revenue in 1995 . The arrival of thousands of Mexican and Spanish tourists led to increasing numbers of Cubans turning to prostitution ; officially illegal , Castro refrained from cracking down on prostitution , fearing a political backlash . Economic hardship led many Cubans toward religion , both in the form of Roman Catholicism and Santeria . Although long thinking religious belief to be backward , Castro softened his approach to religious institutions and religious people were permitted for the first time to join the Communist Party . Although he viewed the Roman Catholic Church as a reactionary , pro @-@ capitalist institution , Castro organized a visit to Cuba by Pope John Paul II for January 1998 ; it strengthened the position of both the Cuban Church and Castro 's government . 
 In the early 1990s Castro embraced environmentalism , campaigning against global warming and the waste of natural resources , and accusing the U.S. of being the world 's primary <unk> . In 1994 a ministry dedicated to the environment was established , and new laws established in 1997 that promoted awareness of environmental issues throughout Cuba and stressed the sustainable use of natural resources . By 2006 , Cuba was the world 's only nation which met the United Nations Development Programme 's definition of sustainable development , with an ecological footprint of less than 1 @.@ 8 hectares per capita and a Human Development Index of over 0 @.@ 8 . Castro also became a proponent of the anti @-@ globalization movement , criticizing U.S. global hegemony and the control exerted by multinationals . Castro maintained his devout anti @-@ apartheid beliefs , and at the July 26 celebrations in 1991 , he was joined onstage by the South African political activist Nelson Mandela , recently released from prison . Mandela praised Cuba 's involvement in battling South Africa in Angola and thanked Castro personally . He later attended Mandela 's inauguration as President of South Africa in 1994 . In 2001 he attended the Conference Against Racism in South Africa at which he lectured on the global spread of racial stereotypes through U.S. film . 
 = = = Pink tide : 2000 – 06 = = = 
 Mired in economic problems , Cuba would be aided by the election of socialist and anti @-@ imperialist Hugo Chávez to the Venezuelan Presidency in 1999 . Castro and Chávez developed a close friendship , with the former acting as a mentor and father @-@ figure to the latter , and together they built an alliance that had repercussions throughout Latin America . In 2000 , they signed an agreement through which Cuba would send 20 @,@ 000 medics to Venezuela , in return receiving 53 @,@ 000 barrels of oil per day at preferential rates ; in 2004 , this trade was stepped up , with Cuba sending 40 @,@ 000 medics and Venezuela providing 90 @,@ 000 barrels a day . That same year , Castro initiated <unk> Milagro , a joint medical project which aimed to provide free eye operations on 300 @,@ 000 individuals from each nation . The alliance boosted the Cuban economy , and in May 2005 Castro doubled the minimum wage for 1 @.@ 6 million workers , raised pensions , and delivered new kitchen appliances to Cuba 's poorest residents . Some economic problems remained ; in 2004 , Castro shut down 118 factories , including steel plants , sugar mills and paper processors to compensate for the crisis of fuel shortages . 
 Cuba and Venezuela were the founding members of the Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas ( ALBA ) . ALBA sought to redistribute wealth evenly throughout member countries , to protect the region 's agriculture , and to oppose economic liberalization and privatization . ALBA 's origins lay in a December 2004 agreement signed between the two countries , and was formalized through a People 's Trade Agreement also signed by Evo Morales ' Bolivia in April 2006 . Castro had also been calling for greater Caribbean integration since the late 1990s , saying that only strengthened cooperation between Caribbean countries would prevent their domination by rich nations in a global economy . Cuba has opened four additional embassies in the Caribbean Community including : Antigua and Barbuda , Dominica , Suriname , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines . This development makes Cuba the only country to have embassies in all independent countries of the Caribbean Community . 
 In contrast to the improved relations between Cuba and a number of leftist Latin American states , in 2004 it broke off diplomatic ties with Panama after centrist President Mireya Moscoso pardoned four Cuban exiles accused of attempting to assassinate Castro in 2000 . Diplomatic ties were reinstalled in 2005 following the election of leftist President Martín Torrijos . Castro 's improving relations across Latin America were accompanied by continuing animosity towards the U.S. However , after massive damage caused by Hurricane Michelle in 2001 , Castro successfully proposed a one @-@ time cash purchase of food from the U.S. while declining its government 's offer of humanitarian aid . Castro expressed solidarity with the U.S. following the 2001 September 11 attacks , condemning Al Qaeda and offering Cuban airports for the emergency diversion of any U.S. planes . He recognized that the attacks would make U.S. foreign policy more aggressive , which he believed was counter @-@ productive . 
 In 1998 , Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chrétien arrived in Cuba to meet Castro and highlight their close ties . He is the first Canadian government leader to visit the island since Pierre Trudeau was in Havana in 1976 . In 2002 , former U.S. President Jimmy Carter visited Cuba , where he highlighted the lack of civil liberties in the country and urged the government to pay attention to the Varela Project of Oswaldo Payá . 
 = = = Stepping down : 2006 – 08 = = = 
 Castro underwent surgery for intestinal bleeding , and on July 31 , 2006 delegated his presidential duties to Raúl Castro . In February 2007 , Raúl announced that Fidel 's health was improving and that he was taking part in important issues of government . Later that month , Fidel called into Hugo Chávez 's radio show Aló Presidente . On April 21 , Castro met Wu Guanzheng of the Chinese Communist Party 's Politburo , with Chávez visiting in August , and Morales in September . That month , the Non @-@ Aligned Movement held its 14th Summit in Havana , there agreeing to appoint Castro as the organisation 's president for a year 's term . 
 Commenting on Castro 's recovery , U.S. President George W. Bush said : " One day the good Lord will take Fidel Castro away " . Hearing about this , the atheist Castro ironically replied : " Now I understand why I survived Bush 's plans and the plans of other presidents who ordered my assassination : the good Lord protected me . " The quote would subsequently be picked up on by the world 's media . In a February 2008 letter , Castro announced that he would not accept the positions of President of the Council of State and Commander in Chief at that month 's National Assembly meetings , remarking that " It would betray my conscience to take up a responsibility that requires mobility and total devotion , that I am not in a physical condition to offer " . On February 24 , 2008 , the National Assembly of People 's Power unanimously voted Raúl as president . Describing his brother as " not <unk> " , Raúl proposed that Fidel continue to be consulted on matters of great importance , a motion unanimously approved by the 597 National Assembly members . 
 = = Later years = = 
 = = = Retirement : 2008 – present = = = 
 Following his retirement , Castro 's health deteriorated ; international press speculated that he had diverticulitis , but Cuba 's government refused to corroborate this . He continued to interact with the Cuban people , published an opinion column titled " Reflections " in Granma , used a Twitter account , and gave occasional public lectures . In January 2009 Castro asked Cubans not to worry about his lack of recent news columns and failing health , and not to be disturbed by his future death . He continued meeting foreign leaders and dignitaries , and that month photographs were released of Castro 's meeting with Argentine President Cristina Fernández . 
 In July 2010 , he made his first public appearance since falling ill , greeting science center workers and giving a television interview to Mesa Redonda in which he discussed U.S. tensions with Iran and North Korea . On August 7 , 2010 , Castro gave his first speech to the National Assembly in four years , urging the U.S. not to take military actions against those nations and warning of a nuclear holocaust . When asked whether Castro may be re @-@ entering government , culture minister Abel Prieto told the BBC , " I think that he has always been in Cuba 's political life but he is not in the government ... He has been very careful about that . His big battle is international affairs . " 
 On April 19 , 2011 , Castro resigned from the Communist Party central committee , thus stepping down as party leader . Raúl was selected as his successor . Now without any official role in the country 's government , he took on the role of an elder statesman . In March 2012 , Pope Benedict XVI visited Cuba for three days , during which time he briefly met with Castro despite the Pope 's vocal opposition to Cuba 's government . Later that year it was revealed that along with Hugo Chávez , Castro had played a significant behind @-@ the @-@ scenes role in orchestrating peace talks between the Colombian government and the far left FARC guerrilla movement to end the conflict which had raged since 1964 . During the North Korea crisis of 2013 , he urged both the North Korean and U.S. governments to show restraint . Calling the situation " incredible and absurd , " he maintained that war would not benefit either side , and that it represented " one of the gravest risks of nuclear war " since the Cuban missile crisis . 
 In December 2014 , Castro was awarded the Chinese Confucius Peace Prize for seeking peaceful solutions to his nation 's conflict with the U.S. and for his post @-@ retirement efforts to prevent nuclear war . In January 2015 , he publicly commented on the " Cuban Thaw " , an increased normalization between Cuba @-@ U.S. relations , by stating that while it was a positive move for establishing peace in the region , he mistrusted the U.S. government . 
 = = Political ideology = = 
 Castro proclaimed himself to be " a Socialist , a Marxist , and a Leninist " , and has publicly identified as a Marxist @-@ Leninist since December 1961 . As a Marxist , Castro sought to move Cuba from a capitalist state in which it was dominated by foreign imperialism to a socialist society and ultimately a communist society . Influenced by Guevara , he suggested that Cuba could evade most stages of socialism and progress straight to communism . Castro 's government was also nationalistic , with Castro declaring that " We are not only Marxist @-@ Leninists , but also nationalists and patriots " . Historian Richard Gott remarked that one of the keys to Castro 's success was in his ability to utilize the " twin themes of socialism and nationalism " and keep them " endlessly in play . " Castro describes Karl Marx and Cuban nationalist José Martí as his main political influences , although Gott believed that ultimately Martí remained more important than Marx in Castro 's politics . Castro described Martí 's political ideas as " a philosophy of independence and an exceptional humanistic philosophy " , and his supporters and apologists have repeatedly claimed great similarity between the two figures . 
 Biographer <unk> <unk> described Castro 's government as a " highly individual , socialist @-@ nationalist " <unk> " system " , with Theodore Draper terming his approach " <unk> " , viewing it as a blend of European socialism with the Latin American revolutionary tradition . Political scientist Paul C. Sondrol has described Castro 's approach to politics as " totalitarian utopianism " , with a style of leadership that drew upon the wider Latin American phenomenon of the caudillo . Castro took a relatively socially conservative stance on many issues , opposing drug use , gambling , and prostitution , which he viewed as moral evils . Instead he advocated hard work , family values , integrity , and self @-@ discipline . 
 = = Personal and public life = = 
 Biographer Leycester Coltman described Castro as " fiercely hard @-@ working , dedicated [ , ] loyal ... generous and magnanimous " but noted that he could be " vindictive and unforgiving " . He asserted that Castro " always had a keen sense of humor and could laugh at himself " but could equally be " a bad loser " who would act with " ferocious rage if he thought that he was being humiliated . " Castro was well known for throwing tantrums , and could make " snap judgements " which he refused to back down from . Biographer Peter Bourne noted that Castro " suffers fools poorly " and that in his younger years he was intolerant of those who did not share his views . He claimed that Castro liked to meet with ordinary citizens , both in Cuba and abroad , but took a particularly paternal attitude toward Cubans , treating them as if " they were a part of his own giant family . " British historian Alex Von Tunzelmann commented that " though ruthless , [ Castro ] was a patriot , a man with a profound sense that it was his mission to save the Cuban people " . 
 Castro was known for his busy working hours , often only going to bed at 3 or 4 a.m. He preferred to meet foreign diplomats in these early hours , believing that they would be tired and he could gain the upper hand in negotiations . He described Ernest Hemingway as his favorite writer , and enjoyed reading but was uninterested in music . A sports fan , he also spent much of his time trying to keep fit , undertaking regular exercise . He took a great interest in gastronomy , as well as wine and whisky , and as Cuban leader was known to wander into his kitchen to discuss cookery with his chefs . Castro had a lifelong love of guns , and a preference for life in the countryside over the city . While various sources state that Castro has not enriched himself , instead living a life more modest than most Latin American presidents , his former bodyguard Juan Reinaldo Sánchez alleged that Castro lived in great luxury , with several houses and yachts which he has hidden from the Cuban populace . 
 Fidel Castro 's religious beliefs have been a matter of some debate ; he was baptized and raised a Roman Catholic but has commented that he is an atheist . He criticized use of the Bible to justify the oppression of women and Africans , but commented that Christianity exhibited " a group of very humane precepts " which gave the world " ethical values " and a " sense of social justice " , relating that " If people call me Christian , not from the standpoint of religion but from the standpoint of social vision , I declare that I am a Christian . " He has espoused the idea that Jesus Christ was a communist , citing the feeding of the 5000 and the story of Jesus and the rich young man as evidence . 
 = = = Public image = = = 
 Political scientist Paul C. Sondrol characterized Castro as " quintessentially totalitarian in his charismatic appeal , utopian functional role and public , transformative utilisation of power . " Unlike a number of other Soviet @-@ era communist leaders , Castro 's government did not intentionally construct a cult of personality around him , although his popularity among segments of the Cuban populace nevertheless led to one developing in the early years of his administration . By 2006 , the BBC reported that Castro 's image could frequently be found in Cuban stores , classrooms , taxicabs , and on national television . Throughout his administration , large throngs of supporters gathered to cheer at Castro 's fiery speeches , which typically lasted for hours and which were delivered without the use of written notes . During speeches Castro regularly cited reports and books he had read on a wide variety of subjects , including military matters , plant cultivation , filmmaking , and chess strategies . 
 For 37 years , Castro publicly wore nothing but olive @-@ green military fatigues , emphasizing his role as the perpetual revolutionary , but in the mid @-@ 1990s began wearing dark civilian suits and <unk> publicly as well . Within Cuba , Castro is often nicknamed " El Caballo " ( " The Horse " ) , a label attributed to Cuban entertainer Benny Moré which alludes to Castro 's well known womanizing during the 1950s and early 1960s , and during this period Castro himself was widely recognized as a sex symbol in Cuba . 
 = = = Family and friends = = = 
 Many details of Castro 's private life , particularly involving his family members , are scarce as such information is censored by state media . Castro 's biographer Robert E. Quirk noted that throughout his life , the Cuban leader had been " unable to form a lasting sexual relationship with any female . " Castro 's first wife was Mirta Díaz @-@ Balart , whom he married in October 1948 , and together they have a son , Fidel Ángel " Fidelito " Castro Díaz @-@ Balart , born in September 1949 . Díaz @-@ Balart and Castro divorced in 1955 , and she moved to Spain , although allegedly returned to Cuba in 2002 to live with Fidelito . Fidelito grew up in Cuba ; for a time , he ran Cuba 's atomic @-@ energy commission before being removed from the post by his father . 
 Fidel has five other sons by his second wife , Dalia Soto del Valle : Antonio , Alejandro , Alexis , Alexander " Alex " , and Ángel Castro Soto del Valle . While Fidel was married to Mirta , he had an affair with Natalia " Naty " Revuelta Clews , who gave birth to his daughter , Alina Fernández Revuelta . Alina left Cuba in 1993 , disguised as a Spanish tourist , and sought asylum in the U.S. , from where she has criticized her father 's policies . By an unnamed woman he had another son , Jorge Ángel Castro . Fidel has another daughter , Francisca <unk> ( born 1953 ) the result of a one night affair . <unk> and her husband now live in Miami . Castro often engaged in one night stands with women , some of whom were specially selected for him while visiting foreign allies . His sister Juanita Castro has been living in the United States since the early 1960s , and is an opponent of her brother 's regime . 
 While in power , Castro 's two closest male friends were the former Mayor of Havana Pepin Naranjo and his own personal physician , René Vallejo . From 1980 until his death in 1995 , Naranjo headed Castro 's team of advisers . Castro also had a deep friendship with fellow revolutionary Celia Sanchez , who accompanied him almost everywhere during the 1960s , and controlled almost all access to the leader . Castro was also a good friend of the Colombian novelist Gabriel García Márquez . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Historian and journalist Richard Gott considered Castro to be " one of the most extraordinary political figures of the twentieth century " , noting that he had become a " world hero in the mould of Garibaldi " to people throughout the developing world for his anti @-@ imperialist efforts . Bourne described Castro as " an influential world leader " who commanded " great respect " from individuals of all political ideologies across the developing world . Wayne S. Smith , former Chief of the US Interests Section in Havana , noted that in the early 21st century , Castro was met with " warm applause " throughout the Western Hemisphere due to his opposition to U.S. socio @-@ political dominance and for transforming Cuba from a " banana republic " into a nation with significant international influence . He has been awarded a wide variety of awards and honors from foreign governments , and has been cited as an inspiration for foreign leaders like Ahmed Ben Bella , and Nelson Mandela , who subsequently awarded him South Africa 's highest civilian award for foreigners , the Order of Good Hope . Bolivian President Evo Morales described him as " the grandfather of all Latin American revolutionaries " , while biographer <unk> <unk> stated that " he will go down in history as one of the few revolutionaries who remained true to his principles . " 
 Castro has been heavily criticized by governments and human rights organizations in the Western world , and was widely despised throughout the U.S. He has been widely described as a " dictator " , although Castro has publicly refuted this label , stating that he constitutionally held less power than most heads of state and insisting that his regime allowed for greater democratic involvement in policy making than Western liberal democracies . Nevertheless , critics claim that Castro wielded significant unofficial influence aside from his official duties . Quirk stated that Castro wielded " absolute power " in Cuba , albeit not in a legal or constitutional manner , while Bourne claimed that power in Cuba was " completely invested " in Castro , adding that it was very rare for " a country and a people " to have been so completely dominated by " the personality of one man " . Sondrol suggested that in leading " a political system largely [ of ] his own creation and bearing his indelible stamp " Castro 's leadership style warranted comparisons with other totalitarian leaders like Mao Zedong , Joseph Stalin , Adolf Hitler , and Benito Mussolini . 
 Human rights advocacy groups have criticized Castro 's administration for committing human rights abuses . Human Rights Watch stated that his government constructed a " repressive machinery " which deprived Cubans of their " basic rights " . Castro has defended his government 's record on human rights , stating that the state must limit the freedoms of individuals and imprison those involved in counter @-@ revolutionary activity in order to protect the rights of the collective populace , such as the right to employment , education , and health care . 
 = 1896 Michigan Wolverines football team = 
 The 1896 Michigan Wolverines football team represented the University of Michigan in the 1896 college football season . They played their home games at Regents Field in Ann Arbor , Michigan and competed in the newly established Western Conference , later to be known as the Big Ten Conference . The team , with William Ward as head coach , started the season with nine consecutive wins in which the Wolverines outscored their opponents by a combined score of 256 to 4 . In the final game of the season , played on Thanksgiving Day at the Chicago Coliseum , the team lost a close game to Amos Alonzo Stagg 's University of Chicago team by a score of 7 – 6 . The 1896 Michigan – Chicago game was the first college football game played indoors , and the last portion of the game was also played under electric lights . Henry M. Senter was the team captain . 
 = = Preseason developments = = 
 Before the 1896 football season took the field , two developments occurred . First , Michigan joined the Western Inter @-@ collegiate Athletic Conference ( later renamed the Big Ten Conference ) . The 1896 season was the first for Michigan in conference play . Michigan 's three conference games in 1896 were against Purdue , Minnesota and Chicago . Second , William McCauley , who had led Michigan to a 17 – 2 – 1 record in two seasons as coach , resigned as Michigan 's football coach . Princeton graduate , William Ward , was hired to replace McCauley . Before leaving Ann Arbor in November 1896 , McCauley assisted Ward in coaching the 1896 team . 
 Michigan conducted tryouts for the 1896 football team at Sand Beach . The Michiganensian for 1897 reported on the group appearing for try @-@ outs as follows : " Never before had the Athletic field been so teeming with aspirants for foot @-@ ball honors . " 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = Season summary = = 
 = = = Michigan 18 , Michigan State Normal 0 = = = 
 Michigan opened its 1896 season with a home game against Michigan State Normal , later known as Eastern Michigan University . The Wolverines won , 18 – 0 , scoring two touchdowns in the first half and a goal and a safety in the second half . The World of New York reported on the game as follows : " The University of Michigan opened its football season here this afternoon by a loosely played game with the Michigan State Normal eleven . Only four members of last year 's ' Varsity eleven were in the game , although four of them were on the ground ready to play . " 
 = = = Michigan 44 , Grand Rapids High School 0 = = = 
 Michigan played its second game of the season at home against the team from Grand Rapids High School , ( Now Grand Rapids Central High School [ Mich . ] ) . The game was played in halves of 20 and 10 minutes , and Michigan won easily by a score of 44 to 0 . A newspaper account of the game described Michigan 's performance as follows : 
 " Michigan is now rapidly rounding into form and the team played a much stronger game today than a week ago . Several of the new men did some creditable work , and the interference at all times was excellent . Hazen Pingree , at half , made several brilliant runs , and Hannan , at full , punted very well . Bennett , Wombacher , Palmer and Farnham also showed up well in the line . Grand Rapids was never able to gain and the ' varsity scored as she pleased . " 
 Michigan 's lineup in the game was Palmer ( left end ) , Giovanni " Count " Villa ( left tackle ) , Fred Baker ( left guard ) , John David Wombacher ( center ) , John W.F. Bennett ( right guard ) , Frederick Henninger ( right tackle ) , Thaddeus Farnham ( right end ) , Richards ( quarterback ) , Hazen Pingree ( right halfback ) , Thomas Jesse Drumheller and Steel ( left halfback ) , and William Caley and Hannan ( fullback ) . 
 = = = Michigan 28 , College of Physicians and Surgeons 0 = = = 
 Michigan 's third game of the season was a mid @-@ week match against the team from the College of Physicians and Surgeons in Chicago . The game was played in 15 minute halves at Ann Arbor 's Regents Field . Halfback Gustave Ferbert scored a touchdown " on a brilliant twenty @-@ yard run " in the first half , and Villa and Pingree scored two touchdowns each for Michigan . Steel and Hogg each added two goals after touchdown for Michigan . A newspaper account of the game described Michigan 's performance as follows : 
 " The game put up by Michigan was the best of the season . This was the first game in which the ' varsity work has been tried against a heavy team , but , as a rule , the interference was fast and sure and their team work good . Farnham , Pingree , Ferbert , and Villa carried off the honors for Michigan . " 
 Michigan 's line up against the Physicians and Surgeons was Palmer and Ayers ( left end ) , Giovanni Villa ( left tackle ) , Bert Carr ( left guard ) , John David Wombacher ( center ) , John W.F. Bennett ( right guard ) , Frederick Henninger ( right tackle ) , Thaddeus Farnham ( right end ) , J. DeForest Richards ( quarterback ) , Gustave Ferbert and Gordon ( left halfback ) , Hazen Pingree ( right halfback ) , Steel and James R. Hogg ( fullback ) . 
 = = = Michigan 66 , Rush Lake Forest 0 = = = 
 Michigan 's fourth game was played against Rush Lake Forest two days after the game against the Physicians and Surgeons team . Michigan compiled its highest point total of the season , winning the game 66 – 0 . Through the first four games of the season , Michigan had outscored its opponents by a combined tally of 156 to 0 . 
 = = = Michigan 16 , Purdue 0 = = = 
 The team traveled to Lafayette , Indiana to open its conference schedule against the Purdue Boilermakers and came away with a fifth straight shutout and a score of 16 – 0 . The game was played in front of a crowd of 2 @,@ 000 at Purdue 's Stuart Field . One newspaper described the game as " the most desperate game that has ever been played on Stuart Field " and concluded that " Michigan won by superior weight . " The same account noted that " the prettiest play of the game " was a 40 – yard run by Ferbert and has tackle by Marshall . Michigan 's scoring came on two touchdowns by Caley and one by Hogg . Michigan 's lineup was Loomis Hutchinson ( left end ) , Giovanni Villa ( left tackle ) , Carey ( left guard ) , Wombacher ( center ) , Bennett ( right guard ) , Henninger ( right tackle ) , Farnham ( right end ) , Greenleaf ( quarterback ) , Ferbert ( left halfback ) , Caley ( right halfback ) , and Hogg ( fullback ) . 
 = = = Michigan 44 , Lehigh 0 = = = 
 Michigan 's sixth opponent was the Lehigh Mountain Hawks . The game was played at the Detroit Athletic Club field in Detroit and ended in a sixth straight shutout by a one @-@ sided score of 44 – 0 . Michigan 's scoring came on seven touchdowns and five goals after <unk> ( all five kicked by halfback Ferbert ) . During the 60 minutes of play , the ball was in Lehigh 's possession " not more than ten minutes , " and most of that was in the first half . One newspaper account stated that " the Eastern boys were outclassed from start to finish . " The same report gave the following account of the game : 
 " The team play of the University of Michigan was excellent and the interference as good as has ever been seen in this city . The star of the game was probably Ferbert , though the plays of Villa , Farnham , Henninger , and Caley were at times brilliant . ... The University of Michigan is celebrating the victory here tonight , and pointing proudly to the fact that the best Pennsylvania [ 1896 national champions ] could do against Lehigh was 32 to 0 . " 
 Michigan 's lineup in the Lehigh game was Thad Farnham ( left end ) , Giovanni " Count " Villa ( left tackle ) , Carr ( left guard ) , Wombacher ( center ) , Baker ( right guard ) , Henninger ( right tackle ) , Hutchinson ( right end ) , Howard Felver ( quarterback ) , Caley ( left halfback ) , Gustave Ferbert ( right halfback ) , and Hogg ( fullback ) . 
 The 1897 Michiganensian noted that the game was Lehigh 's worst defeat of the 1896 season and suggested that the game was important in measuring Michigan 's standing : " This was the only contest with an eastern team and furnished some basis for comparison . ... Comparison with the eastern leaders was necessarily indirect , but it can conservatively be said that at this time Michigan was playing in much the same form as the great eastern quartette . " 
 = = = Michigan 6 , Minnesota 4 = = = 
 The first close game of the season game in early November in a conference game against the Minnesota Golden Gophers in Minneapolis . In a game played in 35 minute halves at Athletic Field in Minneapolis , the Wolverines came away with the win by a score of 6 – 4 . Michigan came within ten yards of a touchdown five minutes into the game but did not score . The first half ended in a scoreless tie . When Michigan scored its touchdown in the second half , Michigan fans in the bleachers signaled the event with cowbells . Michigan 's touchdown was scored by fullback <unk> and the goal after touchdown was kicked by Ferbert . Minnesota responded with a touchdown ( worth 4 points under 1896 rules ) , but the score came at the far corner of the field where a straight kick for the goal after touchdown ( worth 2 points ) was impossible . Accordingly , Minnesota attempted a double kick , kicking the ball first to the fullback Loomis . Loomis caught the ball so close to the goal posts that his kick for goal " was easily stopped by Michigan players . " The blocked kick was the difference in a close game . Michigan 's lineup was Hutchins ( right end ) , Henninger ( right tackle ) , Bennett ( right guard ) , Wombacher ( center ) , Carr ( left guard ) , Villa ( left tackle ) , Farnham ( left end ) , Felver ( quarterback ) , Caley ( right halfback ) , Ferbert ( left halfback ) , and Hogg and Duff at fullback . 
 = = = Michigan 10 , Oberlin 0 = = = 
 After the road game against Minnesota , the Wolverines defeated Oberlin College by a score of 10 – 0 in front of a crowd of 1 @,@ 000 spectators in Ann Arbor . An account of the game published in The World of New York reported : " Michigan put a substitute team against Oberlin to @-@ day and won by making two touchdowns in the first half . Oberlin forced the fighting towards the end of the game . " 
 = = = Michigan 28 , Wittenberg 0 = = = 
 In the final home game of the 1896 season , Michigan defeated Wittenberg College by a score of 28 – 0 . The game was described by the press as " a fine exhibition of football , " and the Wittenberg team was credited with playing " a sportsmanlike and fast game . " The game was played on " extremely muddy grounds " at Regents Field , but the conditions did not stop Michigan 's interference . Three minutes into the game , Michigan 's right end scored the first touchdown " on a pretty quarterback kick from the thirty yard line . " Michigan reportedly " found no trouble in gaining as she pleased , " scoring 18 points in the first half and 10 more in the second . Halfbacks Coley and Pingree each scored two touchdowns for Michigan . The game was played in halves of 20 and 15 minutes . Michigan 's lineup in the game was Farnham ( left end ) , Villa ( left tackle ) , Carr ( left guard ) , Wombacher ( center ) , Bennett ( right guard ) , Henninger ( right tackle ) , Greenleaf ( right end ) , Drumheller ( quarterback ) , Pingree and Gordon ( left halfback ) , Coley ( right halfback ) , and Hogg ( fullback ) . 
 Through the first nine games , Michigan was undefeated and had outscored its opponents by a combined score of 256 to 4 . 
 = = = Chicago 7 , Michigan 6 = = = 
 The final game of the season , to decide the Western Conference championship , matched Michigan against Amos Alonzo Stagg 's Chicago Maroons on Thanksgiving Day . Michigan lost the game , which was described as " one of the most desperately contested games ever played in Chicago , " by a score of 7 – 6 . The game featured " few trick plays , " as both teams relied on " straight , hard football . " Hazen Pingree , Jr . ( whose father , Hazen S. Pingree , had been elected Governor of Michigan three weeks earlier ) was the star of the game for Michigan , as one newspaper reported that Pingree 's effort " in the first half was the ' whole thing , ' the plucky little fellow seldom failing to make the required distance . " Pingree was unable to play in the second half , and Gustave Ferbert , who later became a millionaire in the Klondike Gold Rush , took over in the second half and " was equally effective . " 
 Chicago 's scoring came on a blocked punt resulting in a safety and a drop kick ( worth five points under the rules at the time ) by Clarence <unk> from the 45 – yard line . Michigan 's sole touchdown came in the second half when Henninger was pushed into the endzone from the two @-@ yard line , and Ferbert " kicked and easy goal . " Michigan drove the ball to Chicago 's 20 – yard line late in the game , but Chicago recovered a fumble and " Michigan 's chances of victory were dashed . " 
 The Michiganensian described the defeat as follows : 
 " There had been every reason to expect a victory from Chicago . Michigan had played strong and consistent foot ball throughout her schedule – Chicago had been erratic and unsteady . But there is certainly no sport more full of surprises than foot @-@ ball , and the Thanksgiving Day contest of ' 96 furnished as sensational a surprise in as exciting a contest as had ever come off on a western gridiron . There was one great difference in the character of the play of the two teams . Michigan was playing her stock game of football , hard and steady , the game she could have been depended on to play at any time . Chicago seemed to have been trained and <unk> to this one game . There could have been little doubt what the result of a series of contests would have been . But this one game , Chicago won by good generalship , by the most advantageous use of her greatest resource – a magnificent player in a telling place . 
 = = = = Indoor football = = = = 
 The most unusual feature of the Michigan @-@ Chicago game on Thanksgiving Day was that it was played indoors at the Chicago Coliseum and was " the first collegiate game of football played under a roof . " Adding to the novelty , as daylight turned to darkness , the field inside the Coliseum was lit with electric lighting . According to a newspaper account , the field grew dark in the second half , and play was halted for ten minutes to discuss whether play should continue . Play was resumed , and the lights were finally turned on after Michigan scored a touchdown . 
 The crowd was stated in varying press accounts to be either 15 @,@ 000 , or 20 @,@ 000 . Noting that the game was played in the same building " in which five months ago W. J. Bryan was nominated for the presidency , " the press proclaimed the experiment in indoor football to be a success : 
 " One thing at least was settled by the game , and that is , that indoor football is literally and figuratively speaking a howling success . The men had no trouble in catching punts , and football was played on its merits , without the handicaps of a wet field or a strong wind . Toward the end of the second half it got very dark , and the spectators were treated to a novelty in the shape of football by electric light . " 
 Another newspaper described the novelty of indoor football as follows : 
 " Indoor football is an innovation , but it promises to become a permanency for late games . While the other fields about Chicago were sloppy and the players were floundering about in the seas of mud , the athletes in the Coliseum played on dry surface and secure from the elements . A two @-@ inch layer of tan bark was placed over the hard earth , and there was no inconvenience from dust . None of the punts touched the beams overhead and spectators and players were captivated with the comfortable conditions under which the game was played . Darkness came on at 4 : 00 and the players were scarcely distinguishable for a time , but electric lights soon rendered each play distinct . " 
 = = Starting lineup = = 
 Ends 
 Henry Mortimer Senter ( captain ) , Houghton , Michigan 
 George Greenleaf , Brazil , Indiana 
 Thaddeus Loomis Farnham , <unk> , Ohio 
 Loomis Hutchinson , <unk> , Michigan 
 Tackles 
 Frank Villa , Walla Walla , Washington 
 Frederick W. Henninger , Barberton , Ohio 
 Guards 
 Bert Carr , Cedar Springs , Michigan 
 John W. F. Bennett , Jackson , Michigan 
 Fred L. Baker , Hillsdale , Michigan 
 Center 
 John Wombacher , Joliet , Illinois 
 Quarterbacks 
 Thomas Jesse Drumheller , Walla Walla , Washington 
 Howard C. Felver , Batavia , Illinois 
 J. De Forest Richards 
 Fullbacks 
 James R. Hogg , Knoxville , Tennessee ( St. Albans Military Academy ) 
 Ignatius M. Duffy , Ann Arbor , Michigan 
 Halfbacks 
 Gustave Herman Ferbert , Cleveland , Ohio 
 William Caley , Boulder , Colorado ( University of Colorado ) 
 Hazen Stuart Pingree , Jr . , 
 = = Coaching staff = = 
 Coach : William Ward 
 Assistant coach : William McCauley 
 Trainer : James Robinson , hired in 1896 from his position with the Manhattan Athletic Club 
 Manager : Ward W. Hughes 
 Assistant manager : Charles O. Cook 
 = Destination Moon ( comics ) = 
 Destination Moon ( French : <unk> Lune ) is the sixteenth volume of The Adventures of Tintin , the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé . The story was initially serialised weekly in Belgium 's Tintin magazine from March to September 1950 before being published in a collected volume by Casterman in 1953 . The plot tells of young reporter Tintin and his friend Captain Haddock who receive an invitation from Professor Calculus to come to Syldavia , where Calculus is working on a top @-@ secret project in a secure government facility to plan a manned mission to the Moon . 
 Developed in part through the suggestions of Hergé 's friends Bernard Heuvelmans and Jacques Van Melkebeke , Destination Moon was produced following Hergé 's extensive research into the possibility of human space travel – a feat that had yet to be achieved – with the cartoonist seeking for the work to be as realistic as possible . During the story 's serialisation , Hergé established Studios Hergé , a Brussels @-@ based team of cartoonists to aid him on the project . Hergé concluded the story arc begun in this volume with Explorers on the Moon , while the series itself became a defining part of the Franco @-@ Belgian comics tradition . Critics have praised the illustrative detail of the book , but have expressed mixed views of the narrative . The story was adapted for both the 1957 Belvision animated series , Hergé 's Adventures of Tintin , and for the 1991 animated series The Adventures of Tintin by Ellipse and Nelvana . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Tintin , Snowy , and Captain Haddock travel to join Professor Calculus , who has been commissioned by the Syldavian government to secretly build a spacecraft that will fly to the Moon . Arriving at the Sprodj Atomic Research Centre , they meet the Centre 's managing director , Mr. Baxter , and Calculus ' assistant , the engineer Frank Wolff . After witnessing Calculus test out a new multiplex helmet for the planned mission , they are informed of the plan . Haddock is against the idea , but due to his hearing problems , Calculus instead hears him agreeing . An unmanned sub @-@ scale prototype of the rocket — the " X @-@ <unk> " — is launched on a circumlunar mission to photograph the far side of the Moon and test Calculus 's nuclear rocket engine . Before the launch , the centre 's radar picks up a plane which drops three paratroopers near to the centre ; the incident coincides with the arrival of the police detectives Thomson and Thompson , who are initially mistaken for the intruders . 
 Tintin sets out to locate the spies , telling Haddock to follow from the base , as he suspects a spy is in the base . Wolff follows Haddock out of suspicion . When Tintin spots the paratroopers , he is shot before he is able to do anything . At the same time , the power goes out inside the base , and confusion ensues , with neither Haddock nor Wolff explaining clearly what happened . 
 This incident confirms the Centre 's suspicions that the paratroopers were agents of a foreign power , but Tintin fears that efforts to trace any leaked information would be futile . The rocket is successfully launched and orbits the moon as planned , but on its return it is then intercepted by an unknown foreign power , who have used the leaked information concerning the rocket 's radio control . However , Tintin had anticipated this and asked Calculus to rig a self @-@ destruct mechanism for the rocket . The centre destroys the rocket to prevent it from falling into enemy hands . Tintin reasons that there must have been an inside spy who leaked information to the paratroopers , but no suspects are found . Preparations are made for the manned expedition to the moon , but after an argument with Haddock , in which Haddock accuses Calculus of " acting the goat " , Calculus becomes irate and shows Haddock everything that has been built . However , in doing so , Calculus forgets to look where he is going , falls down a ladder and suffers amnesia . 
 After failing to bring his memory back through recent events , Haddock opts to use a violent shock to overcome Calculus ' amnesia , though his attempts repeatedly backfire . Eventually , after saying the phrase " acting the goat " , Haddock successfully triggers Calculus ' memories . After regaining his knowledge on the rocket , construction is eventually completed , and the final preparations are made . On the night of the launch , Haddock initially backs out , though after hearing Thomson and Thompson feeling he would be too old to go , he angrily declares he will go . The crew of the rock finally board the rocket , and later lose consciousness as the rocket successfully takes off , due to the sudden g @-@ force . However , despite attempting to make contact , the ground crew are unable to get through , with the book ending with the rocket flying towards the moon , with the ground crew repeatedly calling " Moon Rocket , are you receiving me ? " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Hergé first devised the idea of sending Tintin on a mission to the Moon while he was working on Prisoners of the Sun ( 1949 ) . His decision to move into the field of science fiction might have been influenced by his friendly rivalry with his colleague Edgar P. Jacobs , who had recently had success with his own science fiction comic , The Secret of the Swordfish ( 1950 – 53 ) . He decided that it would be a two @-@ volume story arc , as had proved successful with his earlier arcs , The Secret of the Unicorn ( 1943 ) and Red Rackham 's Treasure ( 1944 ) , and The Seven Crystal Balls ( 1948 ) and Prisoners of the Sun . He had initially intended on beginning this story after the culmination of Prisoners of the Sun , but both his wife Germaine Remi and his close friend Marcel Dehaye convinced him to proceed with Land of Black Gold ( 1950 ) , a story that he had previously left unfinished , instead . 
 Seeking advice on the story , Hergé consulted his friend Bernard Heuvelmans , who had authored the non @-@ fiction book L 'Homme parmi les étoiles ( " Man Among the Stars " ) ( 1944 ) . In autumn 1947 , Heuvelmans and Jacques Van Melkebeke developed a script for the story , which they gave to Hergé . This version based Calculus ' lunar expedition in a fictional location , Radio City , in the United States . It featured a return of Professor Decimus Phostle , a character who had previously appeared in The Shooting Star ( 1942 ) , but this time as an antagonist ; Phostle had sold the secrets of the mission in order to attain funds to buy a diamond for the actress Rita Hayworth . In early 1948 , Hergé produced two black @-@ and @-@ white pages of this version of the story before abandoning it . Hergé retained some elements of this original script in his finished version , namely the scenes in which Haddock drinks whiskey in a gravity @-@ free environment and that in which Haddock goes for a space walk and nearly becomes a satellite of Adonis , which appear on pages 5 and 8 of Explorers on the Moon . Nevertheless , Heuvelmans thought his influence on the story to be more significant , stating that " In going through the two books we [ he and Van Melkebeke ] really had the impression that it was what we had originally done at the beginning . In broad outline , that was it . " 
 Hergé hoped for the story to be as realistic as possible , and sought to eschew fantastical elements . In his own words , it contained " no <unk> , no monsters , no incredible surprises " . To ensure this realism , he collected a wide range of documents about rockets and space travel with which to conduct research . In this he was aided by Heuvelmans , who collected pictures of rockets and atomic research facilities for him . Hergé 's research archive included an article from the American magazine Collier 's which discussed how humanity could reach the moon , as well as books by Pierre Rousseau and Auguste Piccard . A further work that he used was L <unk> ( 1950 ) , a book on putative space travel by the physicist Alexander Ananoff , with whom Hergé began a correspondence in April 1950 . He also visited the Ateliers de Constructions Electriques de Charleroi 's Center for Atomic Research , striking up a subsequent correspondence with its director , Max <unk> . Hergé incorporated much of this technical information into the story , but juxtaposed it with moments of humour to make it more accessible to his young readership . 
 According to literary critics Jean @-@ Marc Lofficier and Randy Lofficier , possible fictional influences on Hergé 's story include Jules Verne 's 1870 novel Around the Moon and the 1950 American film Destination Moon . Hergé was certainly inspired by a number of photographic stills from the Destination Moon film which had been published . The computer system at the Sprodj space centre was visually based upon the UNIVAC I , the first computer to be created for non @-@ military purposes . Hergé based his moon rocket on the designs of the V @-@ 2 rocket which had been developed by German scientists during World War II . The red @-@ and @-@ white checker pattern on Hergé 's rocket was based upon an illustration of a V @-@ 2 which Hergé had come upon in Leslie Simon 's 1947 book German Research in World War II . He commissioned the construction of a model rocket with detachable parts from his assistant Arthur Van <unk> . He took the model to Paris where he showed it to Ananoff , asking him if it was realistic representation of what a moon rocket might look like . He and his then used the model from which to accurately sketch when producing the comic . 
 Hergé also inserted a cameo of Jacobs into the story , using him as the basis for a scientist that appears on page 40 of Destination Moon , a nod to Jacobs ' inclusion of a reference to Hergé in one of his Blake and Mortimer mysteries , The Mystery of the Great Pyramid ( 1954 ) . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 Hergé announced the upcoming story with two consecutive covers of Tintin magazine each depicting the Moon . The story began serialisation in the Belgium 's Tintin magazine from 30 March 1950 , in the French language . It then began serialisation over the border in France , in that country 's edition of the magazine , from 11 May 1950 . During this time , there were changes to how Hergé conducted his work ; on 6 April 1950 , he established Studios Hergé as a public company . The Studios were based in his Avenue Delleur house in Brussels , with Hergé making a newly purchased country house in Céroux @-@ Mousty his and Germaine 's main abode . The Studios would provide both personal support to Hergé and technical support for his ongoing work . He hired Bob de Moor as his primary apprentice at the Studios in March 1951 . 
 The story was collected together and published by Editions Casterman as <unk> Lune in 1953 . The title had been Hergé 's own choice , having rejected Casterman 's suggestion of Tintin and the Nuclear Rocket . For publication in book form , the story was re @-@ coloured , with various changes being made ; for instance , in the serialised version , the uniforms worn by staff were green , and they are changed to blue for the book volume . A number of scenes were also deleted . Hergé sent a copy to Ananoff , with a message stating that " Your help , your knowledge , has been invaluable , enabling me to get my little characters to the Moon ... and to bring them back safe and sound . " An English @-@ language translation of the book was published in 1959 . 
 Marking the Apollo 11 Moon landings in 1969 , Hergé produced an illustration in which NASA astronaut arrived on the moon only to be greeted by Tintin carrying a sign welcoming him . That same year , the French magazine Paris Match commissioned him to produce a short comic documenting the Apollo 11 landings . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 Jean @-@ Marc Lofficier and Randy Lofficier believed that the two @-@ part story " belongs " to Calculus , because his " cosmic vision moves the story forward " . They further expressed the opinion that Wolff was a unique character in the Adventures of Tintin , suggesting that he is akin to a character from a John le Carré novel . They felt that the moon adventure was " Hergé at his best ... a triumphant achievement on every level " , awarding both halves of the story five stars out of five . Harry Thompson described the entire moon adventure as " a technical masterpiece " as a result of its " uncannily accurate " depiction of the moon . Hergé biographer Pierre Assouline felt that the two moon adventures " mark a stage in the development of Hergé 's work " . Conversely , Hergé biographer Benoît Peeters was critical of the two @-@ part story arc , stating that they had " neither the liveliness and dynamism " of The Secret of the Unicorn @-@ Red Rackham 's Treasure , " nor the supernatural quality " of The Seven Crystal Balls @-@ Prisoners of the Sun . 
 In his psychoanalytical study of the Adventures of Tintin , the literary critic Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès praised the Destination Moon @-@ Explorers on the Moon story arc for its " meticulous attention to scientific facts " , but added that this had also resulted in the story 's " rather pedagogical tone " . He added that in these stories , the main division was " no longer Good and Evil " as it had been in previous Adventures , but " Truth and Error " . Apostolidès opined that despite being a " fussy and somewhat ridiculous character " , through his scientific achievements Calculus grows to the " stature of a giant " in this arc , eclipsing Sir Francis Haddock ( from The Secret of the Unicorn ) as the series ' " founding ancestor " . He goes on to claim that in becoming the " sacred ancestor " , the voyage to the moon becomes " a mystical quest " with science as its guiding religion . Drawing comparisons between this arc and the Prisoners of the Sun story , he drew symbolic links between the scientific centre and the Inca Temple of the Sun , but noted that here Calculus was the " high priest " rather than the sacrificial victim as he had been in the previous story . Moving on to discuss the moon rocket in these stories , Apostolidès described it as a phallic object which penetrated the " virgin territory " of the moon . At the same time , he described the rocket as a " maternal belly " in which the space explorers slept . 
 Literary critic Tom McCarthy stated that in the Destination Moon @-@ Explorers of the Moon story arc , Calculus " embodies Hergé 's ... own wartime position , spun out into a post @-@ war environment " , representing a genius driven by his work whose activities are coincidental to national and political causes . He suggested that the scene in which Captain Haddock rides a pantomime hobby horse can be contrasted with the many scenes in which Haddock is thrown off of a horse 's back during the Adventures . McCarthy also interpreted the scene in which Calculus cries and tears at his hair in response to the rocket 's capture by the enemy as reflecting Hergé 's own anxieties at having his work published and reinterpreted by his readers . He was also of the opinion that several scenes in Destination Moon reflected recurring themes throughout the series ; he suggested that Haddock 's attempts at smuggling whisky into Syldavia echoed the smuggling of treasure in The Secret of the Unicorn , while the " correction " in which Thompson and Thomson were recognised as not being spies reflected a theme of corrections in the series . He also believed that there was an example of Hergé 's secret vulgarity within Destination Moon , with a diagram above Calculus ' head in one scene resembling buttocks . 
 = = Adaptation = = 
 In 1957 , the animation company Belvision Studios produced a string of colour adaptations based on Hergé 's original comics , adapting eight of the Adventures into a series of daily five @-@ minute episodes . Destination Moon was the first to be adapted in the second animated series ; it was directed by Ray Goossens and written by Greg , a well @-@ known cartoonist who was to become editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Tintin magazine . 
 In 1991 , a second animated series based upon The Adventures of Tintin was produced , this time as a collaboration between the French studio Ellipse and the Canadian animation company Nelvana . Destination Moon was the fourteenth story to be adapted and was divided into two twenty @-@ minute episodes . Directed by Stéphane Bernasconi , the series has been praised for being " generally faithful " to the original comics , to the extent that the animation was directly adopted from Hergé 's original panels . 
 = Greg Skrepenak = 
 Gregory Andrew Skrepenak ( born January 31 , 1970 ) is a former Luzerne County , Pennsylvania commissioner , and retired professional American football offensive lineman in the National Football League ( NFL ) for the Los Angeles / Oakland Raiders and the Carolina Panthers . Skrepenak 's professional football career spanned the final three years the Raiders played in Los Angeles , California from 1992 @-@ 1994 and the first year they returned to Oakland , California in 1995 . Then , it continued with consecutive seasons ( 1996 and 1997 ) with the Carolina Panthers in which he did not miss a start . 
 Prior to his NFL experience Skrepenak had starred in the Big Ten football conference for the University of Michigan Wolverines as a two @-@ time All @-@ American , team captain , and four @-@ year starter from 1988 @-@ 1991 . Skrepenak played for four consecutive Big Ten Conference Champions , appeared in three Rose Bowls and won a Gator Bowl MVP . Previously he had been a scholar athlete at G. A. R. Memorial Junior Senior High School where he earned 12 varsity letters in football , basketball and baseball . 
 Skrepenak , who was born and raised in Wilkes @-@ Barre in Luzerne County , Pennsylvania , United States , was elected in 2003 to serve as the Luzerne County Commissioner , a position he held from January 2004 @.@ until December , 2009 . On December 17 , 2009 , Skrepenak signed a plea agreement to a charge of corruption . He would resign later that day . On August 6 , 2010 , Greg Skrepenak was sentenced to 24 months in federal prison . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Skrepenak was born and raised in Wilkes @-@ Barre , Pennsylvania , where he attended G. A. R. Memorial Junior Senior High School . In high school , he was an honor student who excelled in three sports : American football , basketball and baseball . In football , he earned All @-@ scholastic , All @-@ state , and All @-@ American recognition . In basketball , where he scored 1600 points , he was a four @-@ time All @-@ scholastic athlete and two @-@ time conference Most Valuable Player as well as a McDonald 's All @-@ American team nominee . In baseball , he was a three @-@ time All @-@ scholastic awardee and an MVP . As a result of his accomplishments he was inducted into the Luzerne County Sports Hall of Fame and the Pennsylvania State Sports Hall of Fame . 
 = = College = = 
 At the University of Michigan , Skrepenak was a two @-@ time All @-@ American , a two @-@ time " All Big Ten " selection and a two @-@ time " Big Ten Lineman of the Year " . Skrepenak , who wore # 75 for the Michigan Wolverines football program from 1987 to 1991 , was also recognized as a " Samaritan All @-@ American " for his community service . Number 75 for the Wolverines is described as the biggest player to have ever played for Michigan at 6 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 98 m ) , 322 pounds ( 146 kg ) . As a four @-@ year starter , he set the school offensive line record with 48 starts . In addition , he helped his running backs set new standards in yards / carry for Michigan football . During his time at Michigan , Skrepenak played for four consecutive Big Ten Conference Champions , appeared in three Rose Bowls and won a Gator Bowl MVP . His teams under Bo Schembechler and Gary Moeller compiled a 29 – 2 – 1 Big Ten record and each of his teams ended the season ranked in the top 10 . 
 In the January 1991 Gator Bowl , Skrepenak and the entire offensive line , which included Dean Dingman , were named Most Valuable Player . Skrepenak helped the Michigan offense gain a record 715 yards of total offense in a 35 @-@ 3 victory over Mississippi in the Gator Bowl . This marked the culmination of a productive season in which the offensive line helped Jon Vaughn set the Michigan football record for career yards per carry ( minimum 200 attempts ) . Behind true senior Dingman and redshirt junior Skrepenak , redshirt sophomore Vaughn concluded his Michigan career that season with 1 @,@ 473 yards on 226 rushes for a career 6 @.@ 3 yards per attempt average , including 1 @,@ 416 yards on 216 rushes during the 1990 season . 
 In 1991 , he was a consensus All @-@ American . As the senior offensive captain , he was a finalist for both the Outland Trophy and the Lombardi Award . He was the January 1 , 1991 Gator Bowl co @-@ MVP and a Senior Bowl participant . The following season , he was a member of the offensive line that protected Elvis Grbac while he was connecting with Heisman Trophy winner Desmond Howard . Also during that season , Tyrone Wheatley set the Michigan freshman yards per carry ( minimum 50 attempts ) with 555 yards on 86 carries for a 6 @.@ 4 yards per attempt average behind Skrepenak after Dingman graduated . In 2000 , he was voted onto the Wolverine ’ s " All @-@ Century Team " . 
 = = Professional football = = 
 Skrepenak was drafted in the 1992 NFL Draft with the 32nd overall pick in the second round by the Los Angeles Raiders . He stayed with the franchise for four seasons , which included a relocation from Los Angeles to Oakland . During training camp of the 1993 NFL season he was moving into the starting lineup due to an injury to Gerald Perry . However , he was injured during his second preseason start when Charles Haley bull rushed him , which caused him to get tangled up between Jeff Hostetler and the turf and which resulted in a dislocated ankle joint that kept him out for the season . Skrepenak did not become a starter for the Raiders until midway through the 1994 NFL season when he replaced Bruce Wilkerson . He started the final 10 games of 1994 and the first 14 games of the 1995 NFL season before being benched toward the end of the season in favor of Robert Jenkins . Skrepenak was deactivated from the roster for the final two games of the season right before his contract expired . Officially , the deactivation was due to a combination of a rib injury and the flu , but some say it may have also been partially due to vocal play selection criticism . However , head coach Mike White and assistant coach Joe <unk> said the benching was merely a function of the full strength depth chart upon the return of Gerald Perry . Skrepenak was a vocal detractor on the organization after leaving the Raiders . Among the opinions Skrepenak expressed during his time with the Raiders was that the Raiders overemphasized slogans related to team history while setting penalty records as a team . 
 The Panthers signed him in the offseason after the 1995 NFL season as an unrestricted free agent . While he was a Panther , he and Blake <unk> were considered the key components of the offensive line . He was the only Panther to start every game of both the 1996 and 1997 National Football League seasons . He was named to the Panther ’ s All @-@ Time Team . He was released from the team due to salary cap considerations . Skrepenak was rumored to be sought after by the Miami Dolphins in 1998 . However , he spent the year out of football . Skrepenak was in the Oakland Raiders ' 1999 summer camp , but during his comeback attempt he had to leave the Raiders camp in on August 10 , 1999 to attend to personal business back in Wilkes @-@ Barre for several days . Skrepenak was a supporter of the new Jon Gruden coaching administration upon his return to the Raiders despite the fact that he was not as highly paid or expected to start . Skrepenak was a popular offensive lineman with the Raiders and his spot was held in his absence with a special tribute by Steve Wisniewski and Mo Collins who both wore his jersey number in his absence . Skrepenak returned to camp for a few weeks . On August 31 , he was released . 
 During Skrepenak 's career , he played for only one playoff team . Coach , Dom Capers ' 1996 Carolina Panthers went 12 – 4 during the 1996 NFL season but lost to the Green Bay Packers in the National Football Conference Championship game of the 1996 @-@ 97 NFL playoffs . That season Skrepenak helped protect the team 's only Pro Bowler , quarterback Kerry Collins . Although Skrepenak missed the 1993 NFL season due to injury , Art Shell 's 1993 Los Angeles Raiders went 10 – 6 and advanced one round in the 1993 @-@ 94 NFL playoffs before losing to the Buffalo Bills . Skrepenak played offensive tackle during his years with the Raiders and offensive guard during his years with the Panthers . He has regularly played on the right side of the line . 
 = = Political career = = 
 He returned to Luzerne County , where his ancestry traces back several generations , upon retirement from football to raise his three children . He has since become involved in numerous community and political organizations and activities . He was elected to the Luzerne County Board of Commissioners in 2003 and has served as its chairman since January 6 , 2004 . His agenda is fighting drug abuse and crime . However , he has also earmarked $ 2 @.@ 5 million in Community Development funding for the Wilkes @-@ Barre Movies 14 Complex . He is also involved in bringing a new airport to Hazleton , Pennsylvania . Skrepenak co @-@ ordinates his efforts on emotional wellness with Wyoming County . 
 Skrepenak ran for re @-@ election in the November 6 , 2007 election . Skrepenak ran jointly with County Controller Maryanne <unk> and the pair easily outdistanced the competition in the primary to gain the two nominations . Among the controversies during campaign were the use of debit cards for the commissioners based on a new policy effective September 2005 . Skrepenak 's expenses totalled $ 22 @,@ 139 @.@ 93 , including $ 3 @,@ 743 for gang @-@ related training in Los Angeles , California , $ 524 @.@ 08 for an accounting standards manual and $ 798 @.@ 63 for communications equipment . 
 Skrepenak had considered running for Don Sherwood 's United States House of Representatives seat that was contested and won by Chris Carney in the 2006 elections . He had admitted aspirations for higher office . However , after meetings with the National Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee he decided not to run for the United States Congress in the heavily Republican district . Congressman Sherwood 's defeat allowed the district to go Democratic for the first time since 1961 . Skrepenak was re @-@ elected by finishing among the top three in a contest for county commissioner . The unofficial results were Maryanne <unk> ( D ) 33 @,@ 827 votes ( 29 % ) , Greg Skrepenak ( D / Inc . ) 32 @,@ 281 ( 27 % ) , Stephen Urban ( R / Inc . ) 27 @,@ 835 ( 24 % ) and Bill Jones ( R ) 24 @,@ 071 ( 20 % ) . 
 It was announced December 17 , 2009 , that Skrepenak was resigning his position with the Luzerne County Commissioners effective immediately . The resignation comes one day after a source said Skrepenak signed a plea agreement with the U.S. Attorney ’ s office as part of the ongoing pay to play corruption investigation being conducted in Luzerne County . Skrepenak stated that he resigned due to a clash between longtime cultural practices in county politics and the higher standards of public office and the law . Specifically , he was formally charged with accepting a $ 5 @,@ 000 bribe from a developer for voting to accept the developer 's project into a government funded tax incentive program . 
 On August 6 , 2010 , Greg Skrepenak was sentenced to 24 months in federal prison . United States Federal Sentencing Guidelines called for a <unk> to 41 @-@ month sentence . However , his sentence was reduced for cooperation with an ongoing federal corruption probe . He was not granted leniency for charitable works , medical complications or devotion to family . 
 On June 12 , 2012 , Greg Skrepenak was released from a halfway house . He had been transferred from federal prison in Beckley , West Virginia to the halfway house in early April . Since then , he moved back and forth from the halfway house to his parent 's home in Dallas , Pennsylvania , with his parents and his children . He has been released from the custody of the U.S. Bureau of Prisons and is serving three years probation . Since his release , he has worked as a legal researcher for a Kingston law firm . 
 = Weinreb ketone synthesis = 
 The Weinreb – Nahm ketone synthesis is a chemical reaction used in organic chemistry to make carbon – carbon bonds . It was discovered in 1981 by Steven M. Weinreb and Steven Nahm as a method to synthesize ketones . The original reaction involved two subsequent nucleophilic acyl substitutions : the conversion of an acid chloride into an N , O @-@ <unk> , known as a Weinreb – Nahm amide , and subsequent treatment of this species with an organometallic reagent such as a Grignard reagent or organolithium reagent . Nahm and Weinreb also reported the synthesis of aldehydes by reduction of the amide with an excess of lithium aluminum hydride ( see amide reduction ) . 
 The major advantage of this method over addition of organometallic reagents to more typical acyl compounds is that it avoids the common problem of over @-@ addition . For these latter reactions , two equivalents of the incoming group add to form an alcohol rather than a ketone or aldehyde . This occurs even if the equivalents of nucleophile are closely controlled . 
 The Weinreb – Nahm amide has since been adopted into regular use by organic chemists as a dependable method for the synthesis of ketones . These functional groups are present in a large number of natural products and can be reliably reacted to form new carbon – carbon bonds or converted into other functional groups . This method has been used in a number of syntheses , including <unk> A and B , <unk> J , and <unk> A and B. ( See Scope below ) 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 Weinreb and Nahm originally proposed the following reaction mechanism to explain the selectivity shown in reactions of the Weinreb – Nahm amide . Their suggestion was that the tetrahedral intermediate ( A below ) formed as a result of nucleophilic acyl substitution by the organometallic reagent is stabilized by chelation from the methoxy group as shown . This intermediate is stable only at low temperatures , requiring a low @-@ temperature quench . 
 This chelation is in contrast to the mechanism for formation of the over @-@ addition product wherein collapse of the tetrahedral intermediate allows a second addition . The mechanistic conjecture on the part of Weinreb was immediately accepted by the academic community , but it was not until 2006 that it was confirmed by spectroscopic and kinetic analyses . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 In addition to the original procedure shown above ( which may have compatibility issues for sensitive substrates ) , Weinreb amides can be synthesized from a variety of acyl compounds . The vast majority of these procedures utilize the commercially available salt N , O @-@ <unk> hydrochloride [ MeO ( Me ) NH • HCl ] , which is typically easier to handle than the free amine . 
 Treatment of an ester or lactone with <unk> or <unk> affords the corresponding Weinreb amide in good yields . Alternatively , non @-@ nucleophilic Grignard reagents such as isopropyl magnesium chloride can be used to activate the amine before addition of the ester . 
 A variety of peptide coupling reagents can also be used to prepare Weinreb – Nahm amides from carboxylic acids . Various <unk> , <unk> , and triphenylphosphine @-@ based couplings have been reported specifically for this purpose . 
 Finally , an <unk> reaction reported by Stephen Buchwald allows conversion of aryl halides directly into aryl Weinreb – Nahm amides . 
 = = Scope = = 
 The standard conditions for the Weinreb – Nahm ketone synthesis are known to tolerate a wide variety of functional groups elsewhere in the molecule , including alpha @-@ halogen substitution , N @-@ protected amino acids , α @-@ β unsaturation , silyl ethers , various lactams and lactones , <unk> , <unk> , and phosphonate esters . A wide variety of nucleophiles can be used in conjunction with the amide . <unk> and Grignard reagents are most commonly employed ; examples involving aliphatic , vinyl , aryl , and <unk> carbon nucleophiles have been reported . However , with highly basic or sterically hindered nucleophiles , elimination of the <unk> moiety to release formaldehyde can occur as a significant side reaction . 
 Nonetheless , the Weinreb – Nahm amide figures prominently into many syntheses , serving as an important coupling partner for various fragments . Shown below are key steps involving Weinreb amides in the synthesis of several natural products , including members of the immunosuppressant family of <unk> , and the antibiotic family of <unk> . 
 = = Variations = = 
 Reaction of Weinreb – Nahm amides with Wittig reagents has been performed to avoid the sometimes harsh conditions required for addition of hydride reagents or organometallic compounds . This yields an N @-@ methyl @-@ N @-@ methoxy @-@ <unk> that converts to the corresponding ketone or aldehyde upon hydrolytic workup . 
 Additionally , a one @-@ pot magnesium – halogen exchange with subsequent <unk> has been developed , showcasing the stability of the Weinreb – Nahm amide and providing an operationally simple method for the synthesis of aryl ketones . 
 More unusual reagents with multiple Weinreb – Nahm amide functional groups have been synthesized , serving as CO2 and α @-@ diketone <unk> . 
 Finally , Stephen G. Davies of Oxford has designed a chiral auxiliary that combines the functionality of the Weinreb amide with that of the Myers ’ pseudoephedrine auxiliary , allowing <unk> <unk> alkylation followed by facile cleavage to the corresponding <unk> aldehyde or ketone . 
 = Through a Glass Darkly ( Koen novel ) = 
 Through a Glass Darkly is a 1986 historical fiction novel by American author <unk> Koen . A former magazine editor , Koen had never before written a novel and spent four years developing it while living as a housewife with her family . She sold the hardcover rights to Random House for $ 350 @,@ 000 , which was then a record for a new novelist . The circumstances behind the work 's publication led to Koen becoming the subject of much media attention in the late 1980s . 
 Koen 's story is set in the midst of the turbulent politics of the English and French aristocracy as well as the South Sea Bubble . The novel begins in 1715 England , when teenage protagonist Barbara Alderley becomes married to the handsome , older Earl Devane . Though in love with him , Barbara soon discovers a secret from his past that threatens to tear their relationship apart . Barbara must learn to navigate courtly intrigues and financial crises while experiencing personal tragedies . 
 Released on July 12 , 1986 by Random House , Through a Glass Darkly landed on The New York Times Best Seller list . Critical reception was largely mixed , with reviewers focusing on the novel 's prose and attention to historical detail . It has been translated into more than ten languages . 
 = = Background = = 
 Through a Glass Darkly was the first novel written by American author <unk> Koen . She had previously been a reporter for the Houston Business Journal and also served as the editor of Houston Home & Garden before leaving to spend more time with her husband and two children . Desiring to once again have her name in print , Koen was persuaded by her husband to write a novel to help keep busy in between housework . At first sceptical at writing fiction , Koen began mentioning the idea at parties to avoid appearing as a mere housewife . " When you 're at home raising children your status is – well , there is no status , " Koen later recalled . Commencing the novel in 1980 , she wrote three long drafts during a four @-@ year period ; the final manuscript ultimately contained 1 @,@ 300 double @-@ spaced pages . 
 Koen found inspiration from her interest in the eighteenth century . Rather than use the " virginity @-@ sexual tango " trope of most historical romance novels , Koen sought to circumvent the " rules " of the genre and concentrate on characterization . Koen engaged in an intensive research period on the eighteenth century using approximately 300 books , which she often obtained from a local university 's library . She also traveled briefly to England and France . Koen found writing the novel to be " a very intense thing " and became very attached to her characters , even the villains . She sought to " hook the readers emotionally and make them care . I guess it 's soap opera ( but ) there 's a kind of sigh you heave when you finish a certain type of book . I wanted that sigh . " She added : 
 " The heroine is Barbara , and she is 15 when the novel opens and 21 years old at the end . It 's the story of her coming of age , her family , marriage and relationships . I left the exact place where all this happens rather nebulous , but the locale is southern England . It 's all created . The period was fascinating to research – I went through about 300 books . It was the age of Defoe , Pope , Swift and Addison and I lost myself in their time . " 
 To gain a publisher for her novel , she sent the manuscript to several literary agents she had discovered in Writer 's Digest . Though two turned her down , one agent , Jean <unk> , encouraged Koen to continue finishing the book , believing it to be " the launching of a major author . " <unk> mailed the manuscript to five major publishing companies , with Random House purchasing it for a " whopping " $ 350 @,@ 000 in August 1985 , which was at the time a record for a new novelist . Random House 's publisher , Howard Kaminsky , wanted to publish " Oprah Winfrey @-@ type books " in the " how @-@ to @-@ be @-@ the @-@ best @-@ you @-@ can @-@ be " genre . He reasoned , " I 'm sure that 's up there with the highest prices ever paid for the hardcover rights alone to a first novel . But then it is not that big a price when you consider that it 's such a deserving novel – and it will undoubtedly go for a very large amount in paperback later . " 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 In 1715 England , fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Barbara Alderley lives with her widowed grandmother , the Duchess of Tamworth , and her younger siblings on their family 's country Tamworth estate . Barbara 's indebted and calculating mother , Lady Diana Alderley , arrives to inform them of Barbara 's possible marriage to Roger <unk> , Earl Devane , a former aide to the deceased Duke . Barbara is pleased with the news , believing herself to be in love with the handsome , wealthy , and popular earl despite his age ( nearly thirty years her senior ) . 
 Roger in turn desires Barbara 's dowry of land in London , which he hopes to develop into an opulent estate and townhouses ; she and her mother travel to London to make arrangements for the betrothal . Due to Diana 's greed , negotiations almost fall apart until the intervention of the Duchess results in Barbara and Roger finally marrying . The couple travel to Paris . While learning to navigate through Parisian society , Barbara remains in love with her husband but Roger has no thoughts at all for his young bride other than mere fondness . 
 Roger however has a secret : he once had a long @-@ term affair with the French aristocrat the Prince of Soissons , with whom he begins anew soon after arriving in Paris . Through the actions of courtiers jealous of Barbara 's devotion to Roger , pamphlets eventually spread about the affair . The young and naive Barbara is among the last to hear of it and breaks down in tears and shock . 
 The plot jumps forward to 1720 England , where the country is unknowingly approaching the South Sea Bubble economic collapse ; Barbara has separated from her husband and conducted affairs with several men in Paris and London . Still in love with Roger despite his affair , she is unhappy and becomes horrified when she discovers that one of her jealous lovers , Lord Charles Russel , killed Jemmy , a young nobleman who she accidentally slept with for one night . 
 Later , the bursting of the Bubble causes chaos and violence through London . Barbara 's only surviving sibling , Harry , is in severe debt and commits suicide ; many citizens blame Lord Devane , who helped run the South Sea Company , for the country 's finances . At the Tamworth estate , Barbara and Roger attempt a reconciliation but he collapses from an apoplexy soon after while evaluating his own precarious financial situation in London . 
 With the help of several of Roger 's friends , Barbara attempts to oversee his finances and takes him out of the still @-@ chaotic city . At Tamworth , Roger gradually becomes worse and dies . Stricken and in mourning , Barbara holds a public memorial in London for her deceased husband , despite being warned that it would draw attention to his estate during the Parliamentary inquest into the financial crisis . To give her peace , the Duchess develops a scheme of spiriting her granddaughter out of the country by having her visit their plantation in Virginia . The novel ends with Barbara and several servants leaving on a ship intended for the colonies . 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 Barbara Alderley , Lady Devane – young , naive , devoted , and beautiful , she is the protagonist of the novel and Roger 's wife 
 Roger <unk> , Earl Devane – wealthy , charismatic , handsome , and popular , he is Barbara 's husband and Philippe 's lover 
 Alice Saylor , Duchess of <unk> – the venerable dowager of the Saylor family , she is Diana 's mother and Barbara 's grandmother 
 Tony Saylor , Duke of Tamworth – young , shy , and kind , he is in love with his cousin Barbara 
 Lady Diana Alderley – calculating , cold , promiscuous , and greedy , she is mother to Barbara and Harry 
 Philippe , Prince of Soissons – a sophisticated and dangerous French aristocrat , he is Roger 's lover 
 Harry Alderley – impetuous and handsome , he is Barbara 's brother 
 Jane Ashford , later Cromwell – kind and serious , she is a childhood friend of Barbara 's and Harry 's early love 
 = = Themes = = 
 Through a Glass Darkly is a long , complex narrative that features more than 60 characters and at least 15 subplots . The title of the novel comes from the Bible verse 1 Corinthians 13 . Before she began writing it , Koen envisioned creating a story about the relationship between a young woman and an older man , a plot element riddled with emotional tension that required much planning and foresight . Koen also sought to create a story that featured issues relevant to contemporary women , such as the non @-@ existence of " legal rights . If a husband wanted to beat his wife to death he could do it , and if her parents didn 't care ... No birth control . If you had any normal sexual urges you were pregnant all the time , and half the women died in childbirth . Life was very violent and short and I just wanted to show how it was without getting up on a soapbox , so someone reading it would say , ' I 'm glad I live now . ' " According to Koen , another consistent theme throughout Through a Glass Darkly is how vital family is to our well @-@ being , family in this case being a loose term that does not necessarily equate to being biologically @-@ related . She was also interested in writing how people are connected to each other . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Through a Glass Darkly was first released in hardcover on July 12 , 1986 . Koen became known as the " unknown author who hit the jackpot " of a book that " everyone 's been talking about . " Media stories angled the book 's backstory as a " phenomenon , " particularly because it was purchased by a prestigious publisher at such a high price for a first time novelist . After its release , Koen began a seven @-@ city promotional tour that ended in late September 1986 . Avon Books paid more than twice Random House 's price to gain paperback rights , and released the novel on paperback on September 1 , 1987 . Even before it was officially published , Through a Glass Darkly landed on The New York Times Best Seller list , where it stayed for more than a year . It was translated into ten languages the year it was published . In February 1987 , People reported that " plans to turn the book into a big @-@ budget miniseries are also underway . " 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 After reviewing the hype surrounding the book , author Barbara Schaaf concluded that its prose " was first @-@ rate – literate and with flashes of timeless insight . Anyone who can take a 15 @-@ year @-@ old heroine ... and dash off over 700 pages just to get her to age 21 without losing the reader , has real talent . " Schaaf added that Koen has a " fine eye for art , architecture , fashion , manners and relays the everything , " though she critiqued the author for sometimes inserting too many historical details . She believed that the book especially shone in depicting the South Sea Bubble ; " most historical writers , " Schaaf opined , " neglect the economic background of their periods , regardless of its importance , and [ Koen 's ] grasp of a complicated situation makes it as fascinating as her descriptions of the sexual behavior of the upper and lower classes . " 
 People 's Harriet Shapiro declared that Through a Glass Darkly " is no run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill bodice buster , trade slang for bosom @-@ heaving historical romances . Koen paints a lavish , carefully researched portrait of a young woman 's turbulent coming of age in 18th @-@ century England and France . " Texas Monthly asserted that characterization was Koen 's greatest asset , though the story 's " sense of pacing falters " after two hundred pages . Another criticism was directed at the numerous monologues , which felt like having " commercials stacked toward the end of a late @-@ night TV movie . " Texas Monthly ended their review on a positive note , giving praise to the historical detail as well as the story 's ending , which the reviewer believed would encourage readers to buy the forthcoming sequel . 
 In a guest column for The New York Times , author Erica Jong called Koen 's work a " well @-@ researched , workmanlike historical novel [ ... ] of the sort that Kathleen Winsor or Thomas B. Costain used to write : packed with details of costume , architecture and cuisine , populated by rudimentary paper @-@ doll characters , full of undigested Continued on next page <unk> of research . " Jong shone a negative light on some of the characters , which she believed " seem [ ed ] derived from movies , mini @-@ series and other books " and overshadowed by the attention to historical detail . She concluded that " Koen 's publishers [ did ] her a disservice in presenting this rather routine and turgid book as though it were Gone With the Wind , " when it was actually a " well @-@ researched bodice @-@ ripper . " 
 Phoebe @-@ Lou Adams of The Atlantic gave a negative review and criticized the " enormous , gigantic , monstrous historical novel " for containing a protagonist who " suffers and suffers and suffers while innumerable soap @-@ opera types minuet about in fancy dress . The period is early eighteenth century , and the research underlying the <unk> is thorough beyond the call of duty . " In response to some bad attention her novel received , which she said " hurt like hell , " Koen noted the persistence of " in @-@ fighting " within the publishing industry . " Who reviews your book has a lot to do with the kind of review you get , " she said . 
 = United Airlines Flight 736 = 
 United Airlines Flight 736 was a daily U.S. transcontinental passenger flight operated by United Airlines that crashed on April 21 , 1958 , following a mid @-@ air collision . The aircraft assigned to Flight 736 , a Douglas DC @-@ 7 airliner carrying 47 persons , was flying at cruise altitude above Clark County , Nevada , en route to a stopover at Denver , Colorado , when it was struck by a United States Air Force fighter jet crewed by two pilots . The collision occurred at 8 : 30 a.m. in clear weather within a major commercial airway ; both aircraft fell out of control from 21 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 400 m ) and crashed into unpopulated desert terrain southwest of Las Vegas , Nevada . 
 There were no survivors from either aircraft , and with 49 fatalities it remains the deadliest crash in the history of the Las Vegas Valley . Among the victims were a group of military personnel and civilian contractors involved with sensitive Department of Defense weapons systems . The loss of the group triggered new rules prohibiting similar groups engaged in critical projects from flying aboard the same aircraft . 
 The official investigation stated that cockpit visibility limitations played a role in the accident , but also faulted military and civilian aviation authorities for not taking measures to reduce well @-@ known collision risks that had existed for over a year within the confines of airways , despite numerous complaints from airline crews . The loss of United Airlines Flight 736 — part of a series of 1950s mid @-@ air collisions in American skies , including the well @-@ publicized 1956 Grand Canyon mid @-@ air collision — helped usher in widespread improvements in air traffic control within the United States . 
 = = Events leading to the accident = = 
 Flight 736 , a four @-@ engined DC @-@ 7 propliner with registration <unk> , departed Los Angeles International Airport at 7 : 37 a.m. on a flight to New York City with stops in Denver , Kansas City and Washington , D.C. On board were 42 passengers and five crew members ; Captain Duane M. Ward , 44 , First Officer Arlin Edward Sommers , 36 , Flight Engineer Charles E. Woods , 43 , and Stewardesses Pauline Mary Murray , 22 , and Yvonne Marie Peterson , 27 . Of the passengers on the flight , seven were military personnel and 35 were civilians . 
 Soon after takeoff the airliner was directed into airway " Victor 8 , " on a route that took it east over Ontario , California , and then northeast toward Las Vegas . The crew flew the DC @-@ 7 under instrument flight rules , controlled by Civil Aeronautics Authority ( CAA ) ground stations , at an authorized altitude of 21 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 400 m ) toward the first stopover at Denver . 
 Approximately 8 minutes after the DC @-@ 7 had departed Los Angeles , a U.S. Air Force F @-@ 100F @-@ 5 @-@ NA Super Sabre jet fighter , serial number 56 @-@ <unk> , took off from Nellis Air Force Base near Las Vegas at 7 : 45 a.m. on a training flight with two pilots on board . In the front seat of the tandem cockpit was flight instructor and safety pilot Capt. Thomas N. Coryell , 29 , and behind him sat his student , 1st Lt. Gerald D. Moran , 24 , who as part of his training would spend the flight under a hood that blocked his view outside the aircraft , but allowed him to see his instrument panel . 
 The instructor had two @-@ way microphone communication with the student , and his duties were to instruct the student in the rear seat , monitor his performance and maintain a lookout for other aircraft . The F @-@ 100F had dual pilot control and the instructor could take over flying the jet at any time . The training flight involved a descent and approach to Nellis Air Force Base under simulated instrument meteorological conditions from an altitude of 28 @,@ 000 feet ( 8 @,@ 500 m ) . The descent was to be a " teardrop pattern , " with the Las Vegas commercial radio station KRAM as the navigational fix , a process that was referred to as the " KRAM procedure . " The prescribed descent angle for the KRAM procedure was about five degrees . 
 At 8 : 14 a.m. the United Airlines crew radioed a routine position report over the Mojave Desert to notify controllers that they expected to arrive over McCarran Field near Las Vegas at 8 : 31 a.m. Air Force pilot Moran radioed the control tower at Nellis Air Force Base at 8 : 28 a.m. to report that he would now begin a procedural " jet penetration " descent to 14 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 300 m ) . As the fighter descended , the airliner was approaching Las Vegas air space at about 312 knots ( 578 km / h ) on a heading of 23 degrees , flying straight @-@ and @-@ level within the confines of its designated airway . The CAA stations controlling the airliner were unaware of the fighter jet ; the Air Force controllers at Nellis Air Force Base directing the jet were unaware of the airliner . 
 = = Collision = = 
 At 8 : 30 a.m. , despite clear skies with excellent visibility of about 35 miles ( 56 km ) , the flight paths of the two aircraft intersected about 9 miles ( 14 km ) southwest of Las Vegas . The converging aircraft collided nearly head @-@ on at an altitude of 21 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 400 m ) at an estimated closure speed of 665 knots ( 1 @,@ 232 km / h ) . 
 The descending Air Force jet , flying at 444 knots ( 822 km / h ) , had clipped the airliner 's right wing with its own right wing , immediately sending both aircraft out of control . At the moment of collision the F @-@ 100F was in a 90 degree bank to the left at a down angle of about 17 degrees . One eyewitness to the collision stated that about two seconds before the collision the wings of the F @-@ 100F " dipped " ; another eyewitness said the fighter " swooped down " just before the impact . The witness descriptions and the extreme 90 degree bank of the fighter jet — far more than the 30 degrees outlined in the KRAM procedure — suggest an unsuccessful " last second " evasive action on the part of the Air Force crew . 
 Moments after the two planes collided , the only mayday distress call radioed by the United Airlines crew was heard at 8 : 30 a.m. plus 20 seconds . The crippled airliner — now missing about eight feet ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) of its right wing — trailed black smoke and flames as it spiraled <unk> , and crashed into a then @-@ empty patch of desert outside the town of Arden . The nearly vertical impact and subsequent explosion instantly killed everyone on board . 
 The fighter jet — its right wing and right tailplane torn away by the collision — left a trail of fragments as it arced downward , and crashed west of the small community of Sloan into a hilly area of uninhabited desert , several miles south of the DC @-@ 7 crash site . At least one of the Air Force pilots was still in the jet when it hit the ground , but contemporary news reports differ on whether the other pilot managed an unsuccessful ejection at too low an altitude to survive , or stayed with the jet all the way to the ground . Witnesses reported seeing a parachute drifting away from the falling F @-@ 100F , leading to the hope that a pilot had ejected , but when the parachute was located it was determined to be a drag parachute that is meant to be deployed on landing to help slow the fighter down . 
 = = Investigations = = 
 At the request of the local sheriff and United Airlines , the Federal Bureau of Investigation sent fingerprint experts to help identify the human remains . The Los Angeles Times reported that among the dead were 13 civilian and military managers , engineers and technicians assigned to the American ballistic missile program . Articles in the Las Vegas Review @-@ Journal commemorating the 40th and 50th anniversaries of the crash reported that the FBI search went beyond fingerprint matching for identification ; the agents were also looking for any surviving sensitive papers relating to national security that the group of military contractors had carried on board in handcuffed briefcases . The same reports also said the crash prompted the military and defense industry to adopt rules to keep groups of technical people involved in the same critical project from traveling together on the same plane . 
 The Civil Aeronautics Board ( CAB ) conducted an investigation and published a report on the accident . The CAB ruled out the weather conditions and the airworthiness of the two planes as factors in the collision . The report stated the probable cause was the high rate of near head @-@ on closure , and that at high altitude , there were human and cockpit limitations involved . Analysis of the approach angles concluded that a metal frame support on the F @-@ 100 's windscreen " interfered seriously " with detection of the DC @-@ 7 , and a supporting pillar on the DC @-@ 7 's windshield may have hindered sighting the fighter . The CAB accident report also cited a failure of Nellis Air Force Base and the CAA to take measures to reduce a known collision exposure ; training exercises were allowed to be conducted for more than a year prior to the collision within the confines of several airways , even after numerous near @-@ misses with military jets had been reported by airline crews . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The mid @-@ air collision involving United Airlines Flight 736 , and a second one a month later over Maryland , between a Capital Airlines airliner and another military jet , accelerated efforts in the United States to change the way air space was allocated to commercial and military flights . 
 On April 22 , 1958 , the day after United Airlines Flight 736 crashed , the CAB proposed an experiment in which it would set aside part of the air space from which would be barred all aircraft lacking specific clearance to enter it . All aircraft operating in the designated space would have to be equipped for instrument flight operations . According to the CAB there had been 159 mid @-@ air collisions in the years 1947 @-@ 1957 , and that in 1957 alone there were 971 near @-@ misses . The increased speed of aircraft and higher air traffic density made it harder to give pilots enough time to spot each other during flights . Therefore , the CAB said , " it is essential that positive control be extended to altitudes at 35 @,@ 000 feet and on additional routes as rapidly as practical . " At the time such control only existed between 17 @,@ 000 and 22 @,@ 000 feet on certain transcontinental airways . 
 In the wake of the two airliners lost in the April and May 1958 collisions , investigators from a House of Representatives committee — concerned about the lack of coordination between civil and military air traffic controllers — imposed a 60 @-@ day deadline on the CAB and the Air Force to establish new control procedures . The committee also said that eventually a single civil agency should be given the power to regulate all air space for all types of aircraft . Furthermore , the committee stated that military flying should be controlled in the vicinity of airways not only in instrument weather , but also in visual conditions . 
 Four months after 49 lives were lost in the worst aviation accident in the history of the Las Vegas region , the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 was signed into law . The act dissolved the CAA and created the Federal Aviation Agency ( FAA , later renamed Federal Aviation Administration ) . The FAA was given unprecedented and total authority over the control of American air space , including military activity , and as procedures and ATC facilities were modernized , airborne collisions gradually decreased in frequency . The Las Vegas Review @-@ Journal in a 50th anniversary article stated that the act " specifically referenced the crash of United 736 in ordering the creation of the FAA . " 
 The supersonic F @-@ 100 left a legacy of many crashes over its years of service ; nearly 25 percent were lost to accidents . In particular , 1958 was the most costly , with 47 F @-@ 100 pilots killed and 116 of the fighters destroyed , a loss rate averaging almost one every three days . 
 = = Legal aftermath = = 
 Following the collision at least 31 lawsuits seeking damages were brought against United Airlines , the U.S. Government , or both . On September 24 , 1958 , United Airlines filed for damages — based on the Federal Tort Claims Act — against the United States in the U.S. District Court for the District of Delaware . The airline alleged that the United States through its agents in the United States Air Force negligently operated the F @-@ 100F , and sought damages of US $ 3 @,@ 576 @,@ 698 . The court found neither crew was negligent for a failure to see and avoid each other , but held the United States was liable because of other negligence . The case was settled on December 17 , 1962 , with the United States agreeing to pay the airline $ 1 @.@ 45 million . 
 In another case , on January 8 , 1964 surviving relatives of two of the United Airlines crew were awarded a total of $ 343 @,@ 200 from the government , with U.S. District Court Judge Hatfield Chilson finding the Air Force pilots did not use " ordinary care " in operation of the fighter jet , and should have yielded the right of way to the DC @-@ 7 airliner . Chilson also criticized the Air Force for not coordinating instrument training flights with civilian instrument flight rules traffic , and for failing to schedule flights to minimize traffic congestion . The government appealed , and the relatives cross @-@ appealed to have their damage awards increased , but the earlier 1964 judgment was affirmed on September 30 , 1965 . 
 = = Nearby crash sites = = 
 The region where the United Airlines and Air Force aircraft went down has experienced other major airliner crashes . In 1942 movie star Carole Lombard and 21 others died in the mountainside crash of TWA Flight 3 , about 16 miles ( 26 km ) WSW of where United Airlines Flight 736 crashed . In 1964 , 29 people lost their lives when Bonanza Air Lines Flight 114 flew into a hilltop 5 miles ( 8 km ) SW of the United Airlines impact site ; the F @-@ 100F crashed in the same area of desert hills as the Bonanza Air Lines flight . 
 At both of those rugged , mountainous sites , salvage efforts removed the more accessible and valuable wreckage , but scattered and sometimes substantial portions of the TWA DC @-@ 3 and Bonanza Air Lines Fairchild F @-@ 27 were left behind , including the DC @-@ 3 's radial engines . The United Airlines DC @-@ 7 crash site , however , has been cleared of all but the smallest artifacts , and is threatened by development . In 1958 the site was at least a mile from the nearest paved road ; today the spot where the DC @-@ 7 hit is adjacent to a developed neighborhood near the intersection of Decatur Boulevard and Cactus Avenue . Five decades after the events of April 21 , 1958 , a small makeshift marker placed in the sandy soil was the only sign of the loss of United Airlines Flight 736 , but preliminary efforts were in motion to encourage public officials to build a permanent memorial to those who died . 
 = A Rugrats Passover = 
 " A Rugrats Passover " is the 26th and final episode of the third season of the American animated television series Rugrats , and its 65th episode overall . It was broadcast originally on April 13 , 1995 , on the cable network Nickelodeon . The plot follows series regulars Grandpa Boris and the babies as they become trapped in the attic on Passover ; to pass the time , Boris tells the Jewish story of the Exodus . During the episode the babies themselves reenact the story , with young Tommy portraying Moses , while his cousin Angelica represents the Pharaoh of Egypt . 
 " A Rugrats Passover " was directed by Jim Duffy , Steve <unk> , and Jeff McGrath from the script by Peter Gaffney , Paul Germain , Rachel Lipman , and Jonathon Greenberg . The episode was conceived in 1992 when Germain responded to a Nickelodeon request for a Rugrats Hanukkah special by creating a Passover episode instead . The episode scored a 3 @.@ 1 Nielsen Rating , making it " the highest @-@ rated show in Nickelodeon 's history " , and received overwhelmingly positive reviews , including from Jewish community publications . It was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award , an Annie Award , and a CableACE Award . The episode also , however , attracted controversy , when the Anti @-@ Defamation League compared the artistic design of the older characters to anti @-@ Semitic drawings from a 1930s Nazi newspaper . 
 The episode made Rugrats one of the first animated series to focus on a Jewish holiday ; its success precipitated the creation of another special , " A Rugrats Chanukah " , which also attracted critical acclaim . A novelization of the episode was in 2007 exhibited at the Sherwin Miller Museum of Jewish Art in Tulsa , Oklahoma . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As the episode opens , Tommy and Angelica Pickles and their parents are all gathering to celebrate the Passover Seder at the home of Didi 's parents , Boris and Minka Kropotkin . Stu and Angelica , who are Christians , both find Passover boring , and Angelica argues why she and her parents should be at the Seder at all , especially considering Boris and Minka aren 't actually related to them . Following an argument with Minka about what type of wine glasses they should use ( either the glasses that belonged to Minka 's mother or the ones that belonged Boris 's father ) , Boris storms out of the room ; the two families arrive and Didi tries comforting her mom , who believes Boris has run away . 
 Boris hasn 't reappeared by the time Tommy 's best friend , Chuckie Finster , and his dad , Chas , arrive to join the celebration ; when the Seder begins the children set off to search for Boris , eventually finding him in the attic . Boris explains that he felt bad about yelling at Minka , and had gone to look for her mother 's wine glasses , but had become locked inside when the door closed behind him ( it can 't open from the inside ) . Angelica tests the door , and inadvertently locks them all in again . 
 Angelica tells Boris that he 's not really missing anything and admits that she thinks that Passover 's a dumb holiday . Boris tries convincing her otherwise by telling her and the boys the story of the Exodus , hoping to improve their understanding of Passover . As he talks , Angelica imagines herself as the Pharaoh of Egypt , who commands the Hebrew slaves ( imagined as the other Rugrats and numerous other babies ) to throw their newborn sons into the Nile River . One Hebrew slave defies the order by putting her infant son , Moses ( imagined as Tommy ) , into a basket and setting the basket afloat in the river . The basket and baby are discovered by Pharaoh Angelica , who shows Moses around her palace and kingdom , and decides to make him her partner . 
 As Boris explains that the Pharaoh was unaware that Moses himself was actually a Hebrew , Chas enters the attic , looking for the children , and becomes locked in with the rest of them . He sits down and listens as Boris continues : years later , Boris says , Moses stood up for an abused Hebrew slave ( imagined as Chuckie ) , and was outed as a Hebrew . The episode then pictures Tommy as Moses fleeing to the desert , where he becomes a shepherd and forgets about Egypt and the Pharaoh , until the voice of God calls to him from a burning bush , telling him that he must free the Hebrews from slavery . 
 Moses confronts the Pharaoh and demands that she free the Hebrews . She refuses and calls her guards ( one of which was a kid named Justin , voiced by Dana Hill ) to drag Moses away ; he curses her kingdom with terrible plagues until she relents and allows Moses to leave with the enslaved Hebrews . As Boris is explaining how the Pharaoh deceives the Hebrews and prevents them from leaving , Angelica 's parents , Drew and Charlotte , arrive and become locked in with the others . 
 Boris resumes the story : the Pharaoh 's treachery causes Moses to curse her once more , this time with a plague on the first @-@ born children of Egypt . The Pharaoh , after realizing that she herself is a first @-@ born child , bargains with Moses : he can leave if he calls off this final plague . Moses hesitates at first , but complies and leads the Hebrews out of Egypt . The Pharaoh reneges on her promise ( after realizing that she set all of the Hebrews free ) and leads out her remaining army to pursue them . 
 Minka , Didi , and Stu arrive in the attic to find the group enthralled by the end of Boris 's story : Moses , cornered , calls down the power of God to part the Red Sea , which the Hebrews are approaching . They pass through the parted waters , which then crash back together behind them , engulfing the Pharaoh and her army . With the story over , the family gets up to finish the Seder only to see the wind blow the door shut , locking them all in . Boris decides to tell them another story , which Chas at first thinks is about how the Hebrews wandered the desert for forty years before finally reaching the Promised Land . Boris explains that it 's actually a story about how an aunt and uncle of his met at Passover Seder back in Russia . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode 's inception in 1992 followed a call by Nickelodeon to the Rugrats production staff , pitching the concept of a special episode concerning Hanukkah . The crew agreed instead that a Passover special would offer both " historical interest " and a " funny idea " , so Paul Germain — founder of the series along with Arlene Klasky and Gábor Csupó — pitched the Passover idea instead . 
 Germain wrote the episode 's teleplay along with regular Rugrats writers Peter Gaffney , Rachel Lipman , and Jonathon Greenberg ; animators Jim Duffy , Steve <unk> , and Jeff McGrath directed . While scripting the episode , now entitled " A Rugrats Passover " , the writers were forced to audit many elements of the portrayal of plagues , particularly the third one , so it could still be accessible to children and not too frightening . Though regular episodes of the series comprised two separate 15 @-@ minute segments , " A Rugrats Passover " had a special 22 @-@ minute format , occupying the show 's full network Rugrats slot . The show 's voice actors each spent from fifteen minutes to four hours in recording sessions for the episode . 
 The episode was released in several formats , including DVD and VHS . It appears on the video release A Rugrats Passover alongside features " Toys in the Attic " , and Rugrats Passover : Let My Babies Go . It is also featured on the Grandpa 's Favorite Stories video release , with the episode " The Return of Reptar " . Publisher Simon Spotlight in 1998 released a novelization of the episode , entitled Let My Babies Go ! A Passover Story , written by Sarah Wilson and featuring illustrations by Barry Goldberg . 
 = = Themes = = 
 " A Rugrats Passover " was unusual among contemporary animations in its attention to Jewish ritual and tradition . Its portrayal of a Seder dinner received press attention as a rare occurrence in children 's programming . The episode was also unusual among animated series for discussing the characters ' religious affiliations . It revealed Boris , Minka , and Didi 's adherence to Judaism , and compared it with the relative non @-@ participation of Stu and his side of the family . Chuckie and his father Chas , meanwhile , were portrayed as nonreligious yet inclusive and enthused to learn about the customs of the holiday . 
 As with other Rugrats episodes , " A Rugrats Passover " depicts " the innocence of a baby 's perception of the world , " emphasizing the young characters ' intense , childlike reactions to their environment . Creator Klasky identified the episode 's depiction of the Pickles family as " very loving , [ and ] basically functional " as strikingly different from the prevailing trends in contemporary television programming . Another episode element common to the series ' broader themes is its treatment of Angelica 's mother Charlotte , who throughout the episode is glued to her cell phone and engrossed in her business life , despite her professed desire to provide Angelica with an educational environment . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings and accolades = = = 
 " A Rugrats Passover " was broadcast originally on April 13 , 1995 , on the Nickelodeon television network . Repeats of the episode began that Saturday at 7 : 30 p.m. The episode received a Nielsen Rating of 3 @.@ 1 , with a 4 @.@ 8 % share of American audiences , making it the sixth most @-@ watched American telecast of the week . According to Catherine Mullally , Vice President and Executive Producer of Nickelodeon Video and Audio Works in 1995 , the episode was the highest Nielsen @-@ rated telecast in the network 's history . The episode was supplanted as Nickelodeon 's most @-@ viewed in 1998 , by another Rugrats special , when the Thanksgiving episode " The Turkey Who Came to Dinner " attracted 3 @.@ 7 million viewers ( 9 @.@ 4 / 28 ) . 
 The episode was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award in the category " Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) , " but lost to The Simpsons episode " Lisa 's Wedding . " At the 23rd Annual Annie Awards it was nominated in the category " Best Individual Achievement for Writing in the Field of Animation , " but was beaten by the episode " The Tick vs. Arthur ’ s Bank Account " from Fox Kids ' animated series The Tick . In 1995 , it was Rugrats ' submission for a CableACE award ; it received a nomination but did not win . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " A Rugrats Passover " received overwhelmingly positive reviews and became one of the series ' all @-@ time most popular episodes . John J. O 'Connor of The New York Times wrote of the episode " If not a first , it certainly is a rarity . " Ted Cox of the Daily Herald called the episode " among the best holiday TV specials ever produced . " Other reviews applauded the episode for its treatment of Judaism . Authors Michael Atkinson and Laurel Shifrin , in their book Flickipedia : Perfect Films for Every Occasion , Holiday , Mood , Ordeal , and Whim praised the episode for celebrating " secular Jewishness in the wisest and most entertaining fashion [ ... ] Grandpa Boris regales the kids with an epic , albeit abridged , Exodus story . " Halley Blair of Forward Magazine called the episode " a comical primer for getting children ready for upcoming <unk> , " and Danny Goldberg , in How The Left Lost Teen Spirit , noted that the episode 's Jewish themes were " clearly expressed in the context of a mass appeal entertainment . " Among many positive reviews of the episode in Jewish community publications , Gila Wertheimer of the Chicago Jewish Star said that the episode " will entertain children of all ages – and their parents . " 
 Joel Keller of AOL 's TV Squad , on the other hand , noted in 2006 that he " always hated " the episode , and resented that it was one of only two Passover @-@ themed television episodes he could find via a Google search . 
 = = = Anti @-@ Defamation League controversy = = = 
 " A Rugrats Passover , " along with other Rugrats episodes featuring Boris and Minka , attracted controversy when the Anti @-@ Defamation League ( ADL ) claimed that the two characters resembled anti @-@ Semitic drawings that had appeared in a 1930s Nazi newspaper . Nickelodeon 's then @-@ president Albie Hecht , himself Jewish , professed himself dumbfounded by the criticism , calling it absurd . The controversy resurfaced in 1998 when the ADL criticized another appearance of Boris , this time reciting the Mourner 's Kaddish in a Rugrats comic strip published in newspapers during the Jewish New Year . Unlike Hecht , Nickelodeon 's new president Herb Scannell agreed with the criticism and apologized , promising never to run the character or the strip again . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 " A Rugrats Passover " has been Nickelodeon 's first programming about Passover ; the network went on to broadcast other episodes concerning Jewish traditions , including " Harold 's Bar Mitzvah " , a 1997 episode of Hey Arnold ! in which the character Harold Berman prepares for his Bar Mitzvah . Rugrats in turn produced a second Jewish holiday episode , this time to meet the network executives ' original Hanukkah special pitch . David N. Weiss , who had recently converted to Judaism , and J. David Stem collaborated to write the script , and Raymie Muzquiz directed . The episode , entitled " A Rugrats Chanukah , " was originally broadcast on December 4 , 1996 , on Nickelodeon and received a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 9 in the Kids 2 – 11 demographic . Like " A Rugrats Passover , " it was critically acclaimed and became among the most popular episodes in the series . 
 In 2007 the Sherwin Miller Museum of Jewish Art in Tulsa , Oklahoma opened an exhibition of Biblical images in art and pop culture , including a poster for Let My Babies Go ! A Passover Story , the picture book based on " A Rugrats Passover " . Other items highlighted in the gallery included a promotional poster for The Simpsons episode " Simpsons Bible Stories " and a vintage Superman comic book entitled " The Red @-@ Headed Beatle of 1000 B.C. , " featuring the character Jimmy Olsen 's time @-@ traveling adventures in the Biblical age . 
 = A1 ( Croatia ) = 
 The A1 motorway ( Croatian : Autocesta A1 ) is the longest motorway in Croatia , spanning 478 @.@ 9 kilometers ( 297 @.@ 6 mi ) . As it connects Zagreb , the nation 's capital , to Split , the second largest city in the country and the largest city in Dalmatia , the motorway represents a major north – south transportation corridor in Croatia and a significant part of the Adriatic – Ionian motorway . Apart from Zagreb and Split , the A1 motorway runs near a number of major Croatian cities , provides access to several national parks or nature parks , world heritage sites , and numerous resorts , especially along the Adriatic Coast . National significance of the motorway is reflected through its positive economic impact on the cities and towns it connects as well as its importance to tourism in Croatia . 
 The motorway consists of two traffic lanes and an emergency lane in each driving direction separated by a central reservation . All intersections of the A1 motorway are grade separated . As the route traverses rugged mountainous and coastal terrain the route , completed as of 2014 , required 376 bridges , viaducts , tunnels and other similar structures , including the two longest tunnels in Croatia and two bridges comprising spans of 200 meters ( 660 ft ) or more . There are 33 exits and 26 rest areas operating along the route . As the motorway is tolled using a ticket system and vehicle classification in Croatia , each exit includes a toll plaza . 
 A motorway connecting Zagreb and Split was designed in the early 1970s , and a public loan was started in order to collect sufficient funds for its construction . However , due to political upheavals in Croatia and Yugoslavia , construction of the motorway was labeled a " nationalist project " and cancelled in 1971 . After Croatian independence and conclusion of the Croatian War of Independence , efforts to build the motorway were renewed and construction started in 2000 . The Zagreb – Split section of the route was completed by 2005 , while the first sections between Split and Dubrovnik opened in 2007 and 2008 . Construction costs incurred so far amount to 3 billion euro . The figure includes funds approved for construction work scheduled to be completed by 2013 . On the other hand , the amount does not include construction cost related to Lučko – Bosiljevo 2 section since that section was funded as a part of Rijeka – Zagreb motorway construction project through Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb , current operator of that sector . The remainder of the A1 motorway , i.e. , the sections south of the Bosiljevo 2 interchange are operated by Hrvatske autoceste . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The A1 motorway ( Croatian : Autocesta A1 ) is a major north – south motorway in Croatia connecting the capital of the country , Zagreb , to the Dalmatia region , where the motorway follows a route parallel to the Adriatic coast . As a part of the road network of Croatia , it is a part of two major European routes : E65 Prague – Bratislava – Zagreb – Rijeka – Split – Dubrovnik and E71 Budapest – Zagreb – Karlovac – Bihać – Knin – Split . The motorway is of major importance to Croatia in terms of development of the economy ; especially tourism and as a transit transport route . This has been reflected by an accelerated development of regions connected by the A1 motorway . A part of the motorway is considered to be a segment of the Adriatic – Ionian motorway . Once the latter motorway 's connecting sections are completed , those currently spanned just by the Adriatic Highway as well as two @-@ lane roads in Slovenia and Albania , the A1 will achieve genuine importance as a transit route . 
 The motorway spans 478 @.@ 9 kilometers ( 297 @.@ 6 mi ) between Zagreb ( Lučko interchange ) and Ploče via Split . The route serves Karlovac via D1 , Gospić via <unk> , Zadar via D8 and <unk> and Šibenik via <unk> . The A1 motorway consists of two traffic lanes and an emergency lane in each driving direction along its entire length . The sole exception is Drežnik Viaduct where there are no emergency lanes . Almost all of the existing interchanges are trumpet interchanges , except for Lučko which is a stack . There are numerous rest areas along the motorway , providing various types of services ranging from simple parking spaces and restrooms to petrol stations , restaurants and hotels . As of June 2011 , the motorway has 33 interchanges , providing access to numerous towns and cities and the Croatian state road network . The ultimate southern terminus of the motorway has been established to be near Dubrovnik . 
 Between the Lučko and Bosiljevo 2 interchanges , the motorway follows Pan @-@ European corridor Vb , and is concurrent with the Zagreb – Rijeka motorway . The Bosiljevo 2 interchange distributes southbound A1 traffic flowing to Rijeka ( via the A6 motorway ) and to Split . That 67 @-@ kilometer ( 42 mi ) segment of the motorway is operated by Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb , while the remainder of the motorway is operated by Hrvatske autoceste . 
 An automatic traffic monitoring and guidance system is in place along the motorway . It consists of measuring , control and signaling devices , located in zones where driving conditions may vary — at interchanges , near viaducts , bridges , tunnels , and in zones where fog and strong wind are known to occur . The system comprises variable traffic signs used to communicate changing driving conditions , possible restrictions and other information to motorway users . 
 The motorway route offers a scenic ride through rolling hills in the north , mountains in its central section , and along the Dalmatian coast in the south . It serves , either directly or via connecting roads , a large number of tourist destinations such as <unk> in Gorski Kotar , a large number of Adriatic Sea resorts and several national parks and nature parks . In Lika region those are Plitvice Lakes National Park , <unk> Velebit National Park and Velebit Nature Park , while in Dalmatia the motorway serves <unk> National Park , Telašćica Nature Park , Kornati National Park , Lake Vrana Nature Park , Krka National Park and Biokovo Nature Park . The route also provides links to a number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites such as Plitvice Lakes , Cathedral of St. James in Šibenik , Palace of Diocletian in Split and the Historic City of Trogir . 
 = = Toll = = 
 The A1 is a tolled motorway based on the vehicle classification in Croatia using a closed toll system integrated with the A6 motorway as the two connect in the Bosiljevo 2 interchange forming a unified toll system . Since the two motorways are operated by Autocesta Rijeka — Zagreb and Hrvatske autoceste , the toll collection system is operated jointly by the two operators . The toll is payable in Croatian kuna , euro , major credit and debit cards and using a number of prepaid toll collection systems including various types of smart cards issued by the motorway operators and ENC – an electronic toll collection ( ETC ) which is shared at all motorways in Croatia ( except the A2 motorway ) and provides drivers use of dedicated lanes at toll plazas and a discounted toll rates . 
 The A1 north of the Bosiljevo 2 interchange is operated by Autocesta Rijeka — Zagreb and the rest is operated by Hrvatske autoceste , both of which do not report company toll income separately for individual sections of various motorways . Total toll income reported by Hrvatske autoceste in the first half of 2011 was 508 @.@ 1 million kuna ( 68 @.@ 3 million euro ) . This figure pertains to the A1 south of the Bosiljevo 2 interchange as well as all other motorways operated by Hrvatske autoceste , however the A1 represents the longest and the busiest tolled motorway operated by Hrvatske autoceste . Toll income reported by Autocesta Rijeka — Zagreb for the first half of 2011 is 191 @.@ 2 million kuna ( 25 @.@ 7 million euro ) . This sum includes company toll income generated elsewhere , however the A1 section represents the busiest section of the motorway network operated by Autocesta Rijeka — Zagreb . Hrvatske autoceste and Autocesta Rijeka — Zagreb reported increase of the toll income compared to the same period of 2010 of 2 @.@ 2 % and 5 % respectively . 
 Summertime and holiday queues at Lučko mainline toll plaza can be considerable , a problem exacerbated during the usual weekend @-@ to @-@ weekend tourist stays at Croatia 's coastal resorts . In 2009 , in an effort to address the problem , the Lučko mainline toll plaza was expanded to 15 lanes , and a single additional 10 @-@ lane toll plaza was built for fast cashless toll collection in Demerje . The Demerje toll plaza is available via a motorway fork accessible to the A1 northbound traffic only . Vehicles using the Demerje toll plaza default to the original motorway route immediately past the Lučko mainline toll plaza , between the plaza and the Lučko interchange . The faster cashless system has raised the nominal capacity of the road from 2 @,@ 325 to 11 @,@ 150 vehicles per hour . As of September 2010 northbound traffic leaving the A1 must exit the tolled motorway network , since the existing Zagreb bypass is not tolled , and then re @-@ enter another tolled motorway . There are plans for the outer Zagreb bypass to be integrated into the tolled motorway network , as the ultimate solution for congestion at the Lučko toll plaza . That will require construction of a <unk> interchange south of the Lučko toll plaza . 
 = = Notable structures = = 
 A total of 361 structures — bridges , viaducts , flyovers , underpasses , passages , wildlife crossings , and tunnels — have been completed on the motorway between Zagreb and Vrgorac , and calculations indicate that 18 @.@ 6 percent of the route between Zagreb and Split is located on those structures , which is a quite considerable percentage for a motorway of this length . By June 2011 , Ravča @-@ Vrgorac section was completed , including 5 viaducts , 4 flyovers and a tunnel . An additional 15 structures were built on the section between Vrgorac and Ploče , plus on the connection towards the city of Ploče . 
 As of September 2010 , there are seven tunnels longer than 1 @,@ 000 meters ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) on the A1 motorway . The most notable among them are : the 5 @,@ 821 @-@ meter ( 19 @,@ 098 ft ) long Mala Kapela Tunnel between Ogulin and Brinje interchanges and the 5 @,@ 768 @-@ meter ( 18 @,@ 924 ft ) long Sveti Rok Tunnel between Sveti Rok and Maslenica interchanges . The Mala Kapela and Sveti Rok tunnels are not only the largest individual structures on the motorway but they are also the longest tunnels in Croatia . The tunnels separate three distinct climate zones . The Mala Kapela Tunnel spans between the continental climate of the central Croatia and the mountain climate of Lika , while the Sveti Rok Tunnel provides a link between Lika and its mountain climate and the Mediterranean climate of Dalmatia . Both of the Mala Kapela and Sveti Rok tunnels were originally operated as single tubes when they were opened for traffic in June 2005 until 30 May 2009 , when the second tubes of the tunnels were also opened for traffic . The other major tunnels on the A1 motorway are the 2 @,@ 300 @-@ meter ( 7 @,@ 500 ft ) long <unk> Tunnel situated between Otočac and Perušić interchanges and the <unk> , Brinje and <unk> tunnels . Lengths of the latter three range between 1 @,@ 122 meters ( 3 @,@ 681 ft ) and 1 @,@ 542 meters ( 5 @,@ 059 ft ) . 
 The longest bridge on the A1 motorway is the 546 @-@ meter ( 1 @,@ 791 ft ) long Dobra Bridge spanning Dobra River near Karlovac . Other major bridges on the route are the Gacka , <unk> and <unk> bridges — all of them longer than 350 meters ( 1 @,@ 150 ft ) . Also , the A1 motorway comprises the 391 @-@ meter ( 1 @,@ 283 ft ) long Krka Bridge spanning Krka River and the 378 @-@ meter ( 1 @,@ 240 ft ) long Maslenica Bridge spanning <unk> <unk> strait . The Maslenica and Krka bridges are particularly significant as their respective main spans are 200 m ( 660 ft ) long . 
 The A1 motorway also comprises the longest viaduct in Croatia — the 2 @,@ 485 @-@ meter ( 8 @,@ 153 ft ) long Drežnik Viaduct situated between the Karlovac and Bosiljevo 1 interchanges . As of 2011 , there are six other major viaducts completed on the route – — the Kotezi Viaduct , Modruš 1 , <unk> Polje , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> viaducts . All of them are longer than 500 meters ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) . The latest significant viaduct completed as a part of the Ravča – Vrgorac section is the Kotezi Viaduct at 1 @,@ 214 meters ( 3 @,@ 983 ft ) , surpassing all other viaducts on the route except for Drežnik Viaduct . A dispute concerning naming of the Viaduct arose one month prior to opening of the motorway section containing the viaduct , and the structure was even signposted as the Bunina Viaduct for several days in June 2011 , only to revert the name to the Kotezi Viaduct days prior to the opening ceremony itself . The section also comprises the 402 @-@ meter ( 1 @,@ 319 ft ) long <unk> Viaduct . 
 = = History = = 
 The A1 motorway was originally designed in the early 1970s , albeit along a different route than the present Zagreb – Split motorway route . After suppression of the Croatian Spring and removal of the Croatian leadership that proposed and adopted the construction plan in 1971 , all the work related to the Zagreb – Split motorway was cancelled . The plans were revived in the 1990s and new designs were developed to include a motorway section built between Zagreb and Karlovac into the design so that the section could be shared between Zagreb – Split and Zagreb – Rijeka motorways . Construction work started in 2000 and the motorway reached Split by 2005 and was extended towards Dubrovnik later on . Both in the 1970s and in the 2000s , construction of the Zagreb – Split motorway was perceived to symbolize rebuilding of national unity . 
 = = = King Tomislav Motorway = = = 
 The Zagreb – Split motorway , now the A1 motorway , was one of three routes defined by the Parliament of the Socialist Republic of Croatia on 5 March 1971 , as priority transport routes of Croatia that were to be developed as motorways . Originally the motorway was designed to follow a route from Zagreb to Bihać ( Bosnia and Herzegovina ) and then to Split via Knin . The government of Bosnia and Herzegovina issued its approval for the route in Bihać region in the same year . Construction of the motorway was initiated by a fundraising effort — a public loan . The funds gathered initially through the public loan were sufficient for construction of 20 kilometers ( 12 mi ) of the motorway . 
 The 39 @.@ 3 @-@ kilometer ( 24 @.@ 4 mi ) long Zagreb – Karlovac section of the Zagreb – Rijeka motorway , now part of the A1 motorway , was completed in 1972 . Further construction of motorways from Zagreb to Rijeka and Split was suspended for the next 28 years following a political decision of the Croatian leadership , newly installed during Yugoslav suppression of the Croatian Spring , to " stop megalomaniac projects " . It is considered that the true reason for the cancellation of the works was that the motorway was considered to be a " nationalist " project . The conclusion is supported by the fact the road was spontaneously nicknamed King Tomislav Motorway ( Croatian : Autocesta <unk> <unk> ) by citizens investing their money through the public loan after the first king of medieval Croatia , who united Croatia as a single kingdom in 925 . The funds raised through the public loan were left unused for several months , then spent for construction of a road between Vrlika and Strmica via Knin , now a part of the D1 and <unk> state roads . However , the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe recognized the route as the southernmost part of the <unk> route , giving it the designation E59 in 1975 . Subsequent reorganizations of the E @-@ road network , including the latest one in 2008 , transferred the route south of Zagreb to the E71 . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In the beginning of the 1990s , construction of the motorway was further postponed because of onset of the Croatian War of Independence . The decade saw renewed discussion regarding construction of the motorway , including renewed considerations of its route . Soon , the originally devised route running through Bihać was set aside and two new routes were considered : One of them was a modified version of the original route , bypassing Bihać and running through the Plitvice Lakes region while the other was a completely new route further to the west via Gospić and Zadar , which was eventually accepted for construction . Both of the alternative routes proposed that the Zagreb – Karlovac motorway already completed in 1972 were to be used as the northernmost section of the Zagreb – Split and Zagreb – Rijeka motorways . 
 The A1 was a showpiece project of the Croatian government and a symbol of uniting the country . The first attempt to revive the project in earnest occurred in the 1993 , when the excavation of Sveti Rok Tunnel began . More comprehensive construction work started in 2000 and Karlovac – <unk> Gorica section opened in 2001 . In 2003 , the first sections not shared with the Zagreb – Rijeka Motorway were completed : <unk> Gorica – Mala Kapela Tunnel and Gornja <unk> – Zadar 2 . Mala Kapela Tunnel – Gornja <unk> , Zadar 2 – Pirovac and Vrpolje – Dugopolje sections opened in 2004 and Mala Kapela Tunnel itself and Pirovac – Vrpolje section opened in 2005 marking completion of the Zagreb – Split Motorway , culminating with the grand opening of Karlovac — Split section on 26 June 2005 . 
 Construction of the motorway along its Split – Dubrovnik sector started once the motorway sectors north of Split were complete , and the section between Split ( Dugopolje interchange ) and <unk> interchange opened on 27 June 2007 . The last sections to be completed to date are <unk> – Ravča , opened on 22 December 2008 , Ravča @-@ Vrgorac section opened on 30 June 2011 , and the Vrgorac @-@ Ploče section opened on 20 December 2013 . In the 2000s , as the motorway construction works were gradually progressing further south , the motorway earned its unofficial , yet widely used name — <unk> in Croatian press because it connected Zagreb to Dalmatia . In 2010 , Donja <unk> interchange was opened between Lučko and Jastrebarsko interchanges , and in June 2012 , Novigrad interchange opened bringing number of motorway exits to 33 . 
 = = = Construction cost = = = 
 The construction cost for the Bosiljevo 2 – Split ( Dugopolje interchange ) sector of the motorway was originally estimated by the government in 2001 and presented as " 3 x 3 x 3 " – that is , the 300 kilometers ( 190 mi ) of the motorway was to be completed in 3 years at a cost of 3 billion marks ( approximately 12 @.@ 65 billion kuna at the time , or approximately 1 @.@ 533 billion euros ) . In 2010 , Hrvatske autoceste reported that the average cost of one kilometer of Bosiljevo – Split motorway was 7 @.@ 1 million euro , which would mean that the total construction cost was 2 @.@ 21 billion euro for that 311 @.@ 4 kilometers ( 193 @.@ 5 mi ) long segment . 
 Construction cost incurred on the Dugopolje – Ploče sector of the motorway between 2005 and 2008 was reported at 4 @.@ 1 billion kuna and additional 1 @.@ 8 billion kuna of construction expenses are planned until the end of 2012 ( representing approximately 560 and 245 million euro , respectively ) . The latter figure includes construction of the <unk> state road but it does not include full completion of the Vrgorac – Ploče section . 
 = = Further construction = = 
 The ultimate southern terminus of the motorway has been established by applicable legislation to be near Dubrovnik . 
 Hrvatske autoceste , operator of the southern portion of the A1 motorway , ordered the execution of design documents , feasibility and environmental impact studies for the Doli – <unk> section of the motorway that is to be constructed near Dubrovnik . Commencement of construction on this section was originally scheduled for 2009 . Despite an official ceremony to mark commencement of construction works on the section , no works beyond design and study development has been carried out there . 
 The A1 motorway route between Ploče and Doli has not been fixed yet , as several options exist , all of which require the route to cross either an embayment of the Adriatic Sea or a part of the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina , the former being associated with construction of the 2 @,@ 404 @-@ metre ( 7 @,@ 887 ft ) Pelješac Bridge spanning the coast south of Ploče and the Pelješac peninsula . Construction of the bridge began in May 2008 , after a contract to build it was signed in 2007 . The bridge was originally scheduled to be completed by May 2012 . Pelješac Bridge construction contract worth 1 @.@ 94 billion Kuna ( c . 259 million Euro ) was cancelled due to lack of funds on 17 May 2012 . Construction of the bridge was significantly delayed and effectively suspended since 2010 for the same reason . 
 In April 2012 , government of Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina proposed a route in Neum area to connect Ploče and Dubrovnik while serving Neum . That entails branching of the A1 motorway 7 to 8 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 to 5 @.@ 0 miles ) west of Neum , one branch serving Neum and the other Dubrovnik . As of July 2012 no decision was reached on the section of the A1 route . 
 A planned modification of the existing route encompasses construction of a directional T interchange to replace the existing trumpet interchange built at Žuta Lokva . The new interchange is only planned to be built once the A7 motorway is completed between the Rijeka bypass and Žuta Lokva . It shall not feature any weaving , similar to the Bosiljevo 2 interchange of the A1 and A6 motorways . 
 = = Traffic volume = = 
 Traffic is regularly counted by means of traffic census at toll stations and reported by Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb and Hrvatske autoceste — the operators of the northern and the southern portions of the motorway respectively . The reported traffic volume gradually decreases as the motorway chainage increases and as it passes by various major destinations and the interchanges that serve them . Thus the greatest volume of traffic is registered between Jastrebarsko and Lučko interchanges – with 31 @,@ 432 vehicle annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , and 53 @,@ 216 vehicle average summer daily traffic ( ASDT ) figures as that is the section closest to Zagreb . South of the Bosiljevo 2 interchange the first major drop of traffic volume is recorded on the A1 motorway , due to traffic transferring to the A6 motorway towards Rijeka . Other similar changes of the traffic volume are registered near Zadar ( served by Zadar 1 and Zadar 2 interchanges ) and Split served by Dugopolje interchange . Substantial variations observed between AADT and ASDT are normally attributed to the fact that the motorway carries significant tourist traffic . The seasonal increase traffic volume variations ranges 69 % on the busiest , Lučko – Jastrebarsko section to 160 % as measured on Sveti Rok – Maslenica section . The summer season traffic volume increase on the motorway is 120 % . 
 = = Rest areas = = 
 As of September 2010 , there are 26 rest areas operating along the A1 motorway , and additional rest areas are planned along the existing sections of the route and those sections under construction . Legislation provides for four types of rest areas designated as types A through D — A @-@ type rest areas comprise a full range of amenities including a filling station , a restaurant and a hotel or a motel ; B @-@ type rest areas have no lodging ; C @-@ type rest areas are very common and include a filling station and a café , but no restaurants or accommodation ; D @-@ type rest areas offer parking spaces only , possibly some picnicking tables and benches and restrooms . Even though the rest areas found along the A1 motorway generally follow this ranking system , there are considerable variations as some of them offer extra services . The most notable example is Krka rest area — even though it has no filling station , there is , for instance , a restaurant available . The filling stations regularly have small convenience stores and some of them offer LPG fuel . <unk> , an international association of 18 European automobile clubs spearheaded by German automobile club ADAC , surveyed three of the A1 motorway rest areas in 2009 : Krka , Lički Osik and Modruš ( in case of the latter , both eastbound and westbound ) . All of the rest areas were rated as very good , especially in terms of facilities offered . 
 The primary motorway operators Hrvatske autoceste ( HAC ) and Autocesta Rijeka – Zagreb lease the A , B and C type rest areas to various operators through public tenders . As of September 2010 , there are five such rest area operators on the A1 motorway : INA , OMV , Tifon , Petrol and <unk> . The rest area operators are not permitted to sub @-@ lease the fuel operations ; Tifon and Petrol operated rest areas have restaurants or hotels operated by Marché , a <unk> Hotels & Resorts subsidiary . All of the A1 motorway rest areas , except Stupnik and <unk> , are accessible to both directions of the motorway traffic . The rest areas normally operate 24 hours a day , 7 days a week . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Typhoon Sarah ( 1959 ) = 
 Typhoon Sarah was among the deadliest typhoons on record in the western Pacific Ocean , killing around 2 @,@ 000 people . It formed during the peak of the busy 1959 Pacific typhoon season near Guam , and moved generally to the west @-@ northwest . Continued observations from the Hurricane Hunters allowed the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) to track Sarah from its origins to its peak as a powerful typhoon , with maximum sustained winds estimated at 305 km / h ( 190 mph ) on September 15 . Shortly thereafter , the typhoon struck the small Japanese island of Miyako @-@ jima , where the barometric pressure fell to 908 @.@ 1 mbar ( 26 @.@ 82 inHg ) , the second @-@ lowest on record for the country . Sarah turned to the north and northeast , weakening from its peak intensity . On September 17 , the typhoon made landfall just west of Busan , South Korea with winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , the nation 's strongest landfall at the time and only to be surpassed by Typhoon Maemi in 2003 . Sarah later became extratropical over the Japanese island of Hokkaido on September 18 , although the remnants persisted for several days , crossing into the Russian Far East and later dissipating on September 23 . 
 On Miyako @-@ jima , Sarah damaged all of the crops and destroyed about 6 @,@ 000 houses . Damage was estimated at $ 2 million , and there were seven deaths . The damage prompted the Japan Meteorological Agency to give Sarah the special name of the " Miyakojima Typhoon " . However , the effects were worst in South Korea , and Sarah was described as the worst typhoon there in 50 years . Wind gusts there peaked at 169 km / h ( 105 mph ) , the highest at the time in the country . High winds and waves heavily damaged the port of Busan . Nationwide , the storm destroyed over 14 @,@ 000 homes and left 782 @,@ 126 people homeless , causing over $ 100 million in damage . At least 669 people were killed in South Korea , and an additional 1 @,@ 200 fishermen were lost offshore the country . In Japan , widespread flooding killed 47 people and destroyed 16 @,@ 632 homes . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 10 , a tropical disturbance persisted within the intertropical convergence zone near Pohnpei . When the Hurricane Hunters approached the system at 02 : 00 UTC on September 11 , they observed a center with several small circulations about 130 km ( 80 mi ) east of Guam . On that basis , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center classified the system as Tropical Depression Sarah . The depression passed near or just north of Guam , as tracked by radar . By late on September 11 , the Hurricane Hunters were reporting flight @-@ level winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . Early on September 12 , the JTWC upgraded Sarah to a tropical storm after the circulation became better defined . The storm exhibited a parabolic trajectory that was slightly to the west of the typical September storm . It moved westward initially but gradually curved to the northwest . A Hurricane Hunters flight at 14 : 15 UTC on September 12 observed a 65 km ( 40 mi ) eye diameter , prompting the JTWC to upgrade Sarah further to typhoon status , with maximum sustained winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . 
 After becoming a typhoon , Sarah quickly intensified ; at 08 : 00 UTC on September 13 , the Hurricane Hunters reported flight @-@ level winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Subsequent analysis estimated that the typhoon attained these winds at 00 : 00 UTC that day . At 12 : 00 UTC on September 14 , the JTWC estimated that Sarah intensified to the equivalent of a Category 5 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale , based on aircraft estimates . The typhoon intensified further , and late on September 14 the Hurricane Hunters reported flight @-@ level winds of 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) , estimating surface winds of 315 km / h ( 195 mph ) . The intensity was adjusted slightly downward in a post @-@ analysis , with peak winds of 305 km / h ( 190 mph ) at 06 : 00 UTC on September 15 about 415 km ( 260 mi ) east of Taiwan . In addition , the typhoon attained a minimum barometric pressure of 905 mbar ( 26 @.@ 7 inHg ) . 
 About three hours after Sarah reached peak winds , the typhoon moved directly over Miyako @-@ jima , an island of Japan east of Taiwan . Sarah weakened while curving to the north , and it passed west of Okinawa late on September 15 . The winds dropped quickly ; by 24 hours after peak intensity , Sarah 's winds had decreased from 305 km / h ( 190 mph ) to 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . The typhoon turned and accelerated to the northeast toward the Korean peninsula , re @-@ intensifying slightly . By late on September 16 , the winds increased to 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) while Sarah passed just east of Jeju island . The typhoon weakened again to winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) by 00 : 00 UTC on September 17 . That day , Sarah made landfall a few miles west of Busan , South Korea at that intensity ; this made Sarah the strongest typhoon to strike the country since records began in 1904 , and it remained as such until Typhoon Maemi surpassed it in 2003 . The typhoon very quickly emerged into the Sea of Japan , its circulation becoming poorly defined . On September 18 , Sarah became extratropical after moving over the northern Japanese island of Hokkaido . The remnants continued to the northeast initially before turning sharply westward , passing over Sakhalin . The circulation progressed into Primorsky Krai in the Russian Far East before turning back east . Former Typhoon Sarah struck Sakhalin a second time on September 20 while moving east @-@ southeastward . After passing through the Kuril Islands , the remnants of Sarah dissipated on September 23 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Early in its duration , Sarah brought gusty winds and passing showers to Guam . 
 Shortly after reaching peak intensity , Sarah passed near the island of Miyako @-@ jima . The pressure there fell to 908 @.@ 1 mbar ( 26 @.@ 82 inHg ) , which was the lowest recorded for the station and the second @-@ lowest on record for Japan , both as of 2003 . The typhoon produced sustained winds of 196 km / h ( 122 mph ) and gusts up to 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) before the anemometer broke . The winds destroyed over 6 @,@ 000 homes and wrecked all of the crops . Sarah also left the island without power for an extended period of time after damaging power lines . The combination of high winds and rough seas destroyed a fishing pier and 670 m ( 2 @,@ 200 ft ) of seawall , as well as several tidal weirs . Sarah also sank four fishing boats and damaged seven others . On Miyako @-@ jima , Sarah killed seven people , injured 88 others , and left $ 2 million in damage . The heavy damage on the island prompted the Japan Meteorological Agency to give Sarah the special name of the " Miyakojima Typhoon " . Sarah was part of a series of typhoons striking the island in 1959 , causing food shortages that forced the population to change their diet . The storm brushed Okinawa with gusts of 135 km / h ( 84 mph ) . 
 Sarah was the worst typhoon to strike the Korean peninsula in 50 years . The peak wind gust in South Korea was 169 km / h ( 105 mph ) , which was the highest for a typhoon at the time , with records dating back to 1904 ; as of 2010 , the value has fallen to the ninth place . Damage was heaviest at Busan where the storm struck . The port there sustained over $ 100 @,@ 000 in damage , and nearby American military bases had over $ 900 @,@ 000 in damage . Coastal floods washed away or damaged 15 @,@ 379 homes in the Busan area , leaving 25 @,@ 834 people homeless . The waves also damaged or sank 5 @,@ 400 boats . Nationwide , floods damaged 127 @,@ 000 hectares ( 313 @,@ 000 acres ) of crop fields . Throughout South Korea , Sarah destroyed over 14 @,@ 000 homes and left 782 @,@ 126 people homeless , thousands of whom were injured . The Ministry of Social Affairs estimated property damage at over $ 100 million , and the typhoon killed at least 669 people . After the storm , the CARE relief agency launched an appeal in the United States , collecting $ 18 @,@ 500 worth of shoes and underwear for storm victims . The Australian Red Cross also provided assistance to the country , including money , sheets , and blankets . Due to the ongoing Korean War and Sarah , South Korea lost much of its fishing fleet , resulting in diminished catches over the subsequent decades . The typhoon also caused a rise in the wholesale price index , in conjunction with political uncertainty . 
 A fleet of 46 boats left <unk> near Busan on August 28 to fish near <unk> Island . The fleet failed to return after the passage of Typhoon Sarah , and local newspapers reported all 1 @,@ 200 fishermen were lost . 
 Late in its duration , Sarah struck Hokkaido , producing a 6 m ( 20 ft ) storm surge at Taisei along the southwest coast that left behind a sediment layer 60 m ( 200 ft ) inland . Before the storm arrived , the United States evacuated plans from Marine Corps Air Station Iwakuni to Misawa Air Base , although Sarah approached closer to the latter base . The storm affected much of the nation , flooding many communities , including 14 @,@ 360 houses . Across the country , the typhoon damaged 778 boats . The storm also damaged 3 @,@ 566 ha ( 8 @,@ 810 acres ) of crop fields . Nationwide , Sarah destroyed 16 @,@ 632 homes , injured 509 people , and killed 47 . 
 Overall , Typhoon Sarah caused around 2 @,@ 000 deaths , making it among the deadliest typhoons on record . 
 = Dunster Working Watermill = 
 Dunster Working Watermill ( also known as Castle Mill ) is a restored 18th century watermill , situated on the River Avill , close to Gallox Bridge , in the grounds of Dunster Castle in Dunster , Somerset , England . It is a Grade II * listed building . 
 The mill stands on a site where a mill was first recorded in the Domesday Book , but the present building was constructed around 1780 . It closed in 1962 but was restored in 1979 and is still used to grind flour . The equipment is powered by two overshot wheels . It is owned by the National Trust but operated as a tourist attraction by a private company . 
 = = History = = 
 At the time of the Domesday Book in 1086 there were two mills in Dunster . One which was called the Lower Mill was on the site of the present mill . In the 17th century there were both malt and oats mills but by 1721 one of these had been converted to a fulling mill . The present mill , which was built around 1780 and replaced the two former mills . In 1940 a bakery was added . The mill ground corn until World War II and then animal feed until it closed in 1962 . 
 It was restored to working order in 1979 , winning a conservation award in 1982 . The mill is still used to grind wheat flour . A cafe was opened in the buildings which used to be the wagon house and stables . Further restoration work , completed in 2007 , was funded by the Exmoor Sustainable Development Fund . 
 Although it is owned by the National Trust it is leased to a private company to run as a tourist attraction and an entrance charge applies to all visitors . The site is visited by around 10 @,@ 000 tourists a year and produces 6 – 8 tonnes of flour each year . The second waterwheel was restored and the collapsed wheel replaced in 2015 . 
 = = Architecture and machinery = = 
 The two storey building has a slate roof . To the south east a stone wall contains wrought iron gates in an arched gateway . 
 The grinding equipment is powered by a pair of overshot wheels , which transfer power to the crown wheel via a series of belts . This then drives the grinding stones and sack lift . There is a doorway on the first floor to allow material to be hoisted up the building . 
 An adapted winnowing machine is used to sift the flour produced by the millstones . 
 = German submarine U @-@ 64 ( 1939 ) = 
 German submarine U @-@ 64 was a Type IXB U @-@ boat of Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine during World War II . She was ordered by them in July 1937 . Her keel was laid down by AG Weser in Bremen in December 1938 . Following about nine months of construction , she was launched in September 1939 and formally commissioned into the Kriegsmarine in December . 
 U @-@ 64 had a very short career and sank no enemy vessels . Having left her home port of Wilhelmshaven for her first war patrol on 6 April 1940 , she was intercepted by Allied aircraft seven days later off the coast of Norway during the invasion of that country and was sunk by a bomb from a Fairey Swordfish aircraft of HMS Warspite ( 03 ) . Of her crew of 46 , eight men died and 38 escaped from the sinking submarine . 
 = = Construction and design = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 U @-@ 64 was ordered by the Kriegsmarine on 16 July 1937 as part of Plan Z and in violation of the Treaty of Versailles . Her keel was laid down on 15 December 1938 by AG Weser in Bremen as yard number 952 . She was launched on 20 September 1939 and commissioned on 16 December under the command of Kapitänleutnant Georg @-@ Wilhelm Schulz . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 German Type IXB submarines were slightly larger than the original German Type IX submarines , later designated IXA . U @-@ 64 had a displacement of 1 @,@ 051 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 034 long tons ) when at the surface and 1 @,@ 178 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 159 long tons ) while submerged . The U @-@ boat had a total length of 76 @.@ 50 m ( 251 ft ) , a pressure hull length of 58 @.@ 75 m ( 192 ft 9 in ) , a beam of 6 @.@ 76 m ( 22 ft 2 in ) , a height of 9 @.@ 60 m ( 31 ft 6 in ) , and a draught of 4 @.@ 70 m ( 15 ft 5 in ) . The submarine was powered by two MAN M 9 V 40 / 46 supercharged four @-@ stroke , nine @-@ cylinder diesel engines producing a total of 4 @,@ 400 metric horsepower ( 3 @,@ 240 kW ; 4 @,@ 340 shp ) for use while surfaced , two Siemens @-@ Schuckert 2 GU 345 / 34 double @-@ acting electric motors producing a total of 1 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 740 kW ; 990 shp ) for use while submerged . She had two shafts and two 1 @.@ 92 m ( 6 ft ) propellers . The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to 230 metres ( 750 ft ) . 
 The submarine had a maximum surface speed of 18 @.@ 2 knots ( 33 @.@ 7 km / h ; 20 @.@ 9 mph ) and a maximum submerged speed of 7 @.@ 3 knots ( 13 @.@ 5 km / h ; 8 @.@ 4 mph ) . When submerged , the boat could operate for 64 nautical miles ( 119 km ; 74 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) ; when surfaced , she could travel 12 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 22 @,@ 000 km ; 14 @,@ 000 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . U @-@ 64 was fitted with six 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes ( four fitted at the bow and two at the stern ) , 22 torpedoes , one 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 13 in ) SK C / 32 naval gun , 180 rounds , and a 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) as well as a 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . The boat had a complement of forty @-@ eight . 
 = = Service history = = 
 U @-@ 64 went to sea on 6 April 1940 . For eight days , she roamed the North Sea in search of Allied convoys heading to Norway in support of the campaign centred around that country . During that time she encountered no enemy vessels . On 13 April , the eighth day of her first patrol , she was heaved @-@ to in the waters off Bjerkvik in Norway , and was struck by a 350 @-@ pound bomb from a British Fairey Swordfish aircraft of HMS Warspite ( 03 ) . Her deck was also riddled with machine @-@ gun fire . The U @-@ boat then sank to the bottom of the harbor , eight of her crew went down with her . The remaining 38 were able to escape the sinking vessel and were picked up by German mountain troops stationed ashore . They later formed the crew of U @-@ 124 . 
 = HMS Exeter ( 68 ) = 
 HMS Exeter was the second and last York @-@ class heavy cruiser built for the Royal Navy during the late 1920s . Aside from a temporary deployment with the Mediterranean Fleet during the Abyssinia Crisis of 1935 – 36 , she spent the bulk of the 1930s assigned to the Atlantic Fleet or the North America and West Indies Station . When World War II began in September 1939 , the ship was assigned to patrol South American waters against German commerce raiders . Exeter was one of three British cruisers that fought the German pocket battleship Admiral Graf Spee later that year in the Battle of the River Plate . She was extensively damaged during the battle and was under repair for over a year . 
 After her repairs were completed , the ship spent most of 1941 on convoy escort duties before she was transferred to the Far East after the start of the Pacific War in December . Exeter was generally tasked with escorting convoys to and from Singapore during the Malayan Campaign and continued on those duties in early February 1942 as the Japanese prepared to invade the Dutch East Indies . Later that month , she was assigned to the Striking Force of the joint American @-@ British @-@ Dutch @-@ Australian Command and took on a more active role in the defence of the Dutch islands . The culmination of this was her participation in the Battle of the Java Sea later in the month as the Allies attempted to intercept Japanese invasion convoys . Exeter was crippled early in the battle and did not play much of a role as she was forced to withdraw . Two days later , she attempted to escape inbound Japanese forces , but was intercepted and sunk by Japanese ships at the beginning of March in the Second Battle of the Java Sea . 
 Most of her crew survived the sinking and were rescued by the Japanese . About a quarter of them died during captivity . Her wreck was discovered in early 2007 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Exeter was ordered two years after her sister ship York and her design incorporated improvements in the light of experience with the latter . Her beam was increased by one foot ( 30 cm ) to cater for increases in topweight , and the boiler uptakes were trunked backwards from the boiler rooms , allowing for straight funnels further removed from the bridge rather than the raked funnels necessary in York to ensure adequate dispersal of the flue gasses . As the eight @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) gun turrets had proved not strong enough to accommodate the aircraft catapult originally intended , Exeter was given a pair of fixed catapults angled out from amidships in a ' V ' shape , with the associated crane placed to starboard . Consequently , the bridge was lowered ( that of York being tall to give a view over the intended aircraft ) , and was of a streamlined , enclosed design that was incorporated into later cruisers . 
 Exeter was slightly lighter than expected and displaced 8 @,@ 390 long tons ( 8 @,@ 520 t ) at standard load and 10 @,@ 620 long tons ( 10 @,@ 790 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 575 feet 1 inch ( 175 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 58 feet ( 17 @.@ 7 m ) and a draught of 20 feet 3 inches ( 6 @.@ 2 m ) . She was powered by four Parsons geared steam turbine sets , each driving one shaft , which developed a total of 80 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 60 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by eight Admiralty 3 @-@ drum boilers . The ship carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 900 long tons ( 1 @,@ 900 t ) of fuel oil which gave her a range of 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 628 officers and ratings . 
 The ships mounted six BL eight @-@ inch MK VIII guns in three twin turrets . The turrets were designated ' A ' , ' B ' and ' Y ' from front to rear . Their secondary armament consisted of four QF four @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) Mk V anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns in single mounts . They also mounted two single two @-@ pounder ( 40 mm ) light AA guns ( " pom @-@ poms " ) . The Yorks carried two triple torpedo tube above @-@ water mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . 
 The York @-@ class cruisers lacked a full @-@ length waterline armour belt . The sides of Exeter 's boiler and engine rooms and the sides of the magazines were protected by 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of armour . The transverse bulkheads at the end of her machinery rooms were 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 89 mm ) thick . The top of the magazines were protected by 5 @.@ 5 inches ( 140 mm ) of armour and their ends were 4 @.@ 375 inches ( 111 @.@ 1 mm ) thick . The lower deck over the machinery spaces and steering gear had a thickness of 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 In 1932 , Exeter had her side plating extended to enclose her open main deck as far back as the fore funnel . During that same refit , her pair of fixed catapults were finally installed for her embarked Fairey IIIF floatplanes . In 1934 – 35 , two quadruple mounts for Vickers 0 @.@ 5 in ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) AA machineguns replaced the pair of two @-@ pounder " pom @-@ poms " originally installed . About four years later , the catapults were replaced by a single revolving catapult and the ship now carried Supermarine Walrus amphibians . 
 While under repair in 1940 – 41 after her battle with the Admiral Graf Spee , the navy decided to upgrade her armament and fire @-@ control systems . The bridge was rebuilt and enlarged to accommodate a second High @-@ Angle Control System aft of the Director @-@ Control Tower ( DCT ) on top of the bridge , her single four @-@ inch AA guns were replaced with twin @-@ gun mounts for Mark XVI guns of the same calibre and a pair of octuple mounts for 40 mm " pom @-@ poms " were added abreast the aft superstructure . Enclosures ( " tubs " ) for single 20 mm Oerlikon guns were added to the roof of both ' B ' and ' Y ' turrets . The pole masts were replaced by stronger tripod masts because the Type 279 early @-@ warning radar had separate transmitting and receiving aerials , one at each masthead . In addition , a Type 284 fire @-@ control radar was fitted to the DCT . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Exeter , the fourth ship of her name to serve in the Royal Navy , was laid down on 1 August 1928 , launched on 18 July 1929 and completed on 27 July 1931 . The ship was then assigned to the 2nd Cruiser Squadron of the Atlantic Fleet , where she served between 1931 and 1933 . In 1934 she was assigned to the America and West Indies Station and remained there , aside from a temporary deployment to the Mediterranean during the Abyssinian crisis of 1935 – 36 , until 1939 . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 At the outbreak of the Second World War , she formed part of the South American Division with the heavy cruiser Cumberland , under Commodore Henry Harwood . The ship , commanded by Captain Frederick Bell , was assigned to Force G to hunt for German commerce raiders off the eastern coast of South America on 6 October 1939 . Three months later , Harwood ordered Exeter and the light cruiser Achilles to rendezvous with his own Ajax off the mouth of the River Plate , while Cumberland covered the Falkland Islands . The two other ships arrived on 12 December and Admiral Graf Spee spotted Exeter the following morning . 
 Captain Hans Langsdorff decided to engage the British and closed at full speed . Following British doctrine on how to engage ships like Admiral Graf Spee , Exeter operated as a division on her own , Achilles and Ajax as the other , to split the fire of the German ship . They were only partially successful as the ship concentrated her main armament of six 283 @-@ millimetre ( 11 @.@ 1 in ) guns on Exeter and her secondary armament of eight 150 @-@ millimetre ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns on the light cruisers . Langsdorff opened fire at Exeter at 06 : 18 with high @-@ explosive shells and she returned fire two minutes later at a range of 18 @,@ 700 yards ( 17 @,@ 100 m ) . The German ship straddled the British cruiser with her third salvo ; splinters from the near misses killed the crew of the starboard torpedo tubes and damaged both seaplanes . After eight salvos from Exeter , Admiral Graf Spee scored a direct hit on ' B ' turret that knocked it out of action and splinters from the hit killed all of the bridge personnel except three . Bell , wounded in the face , transferred to the aft conning position to continue the battle . His ship was hit twice more shortly afterwards , but her powerplant was not damaged and she remained seaworthy , although her aircraft had to be jettisoned . 
 At 06 : 30 , Langsdorff switched his fire to the light cruisers , but only inflicted splinter damage on them before some of Exeter 's torpedoes forced him to turn away at 06 : 37 to evade them . Her second torpedo attack at 06 : 43 was also unsuccessful . In the meantime , Langsdorff had switched his main guns back to the heavy cruiser and scored several more hits . They knocked out ' A ' turret , started a fire amidships that damaged the ship 's fire @-@ control and navigation circuits , and caused a 7 ° list with flooding . She remained in action until flooding disabled the machinery for ' Y ' turret at 07 : 30 . At 11 : 07 , Bell informed Harwood that Exeter had one eight @-@ inch and a four @-@ inch gun available in local control and that she could make 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . He ordered Bell to head to the Falklands for repair . 
 Exeter was hit by a total of seven 283 mm shells that killed 61 of her crew were and wounded another 23 . After all Exeter 's guns had been put out of action but she was still seaworthy , Bell planned to collide with the enemy , saying " I 'm going to ram the <unk> . It will be the end of us but it will sink him too " . In return the ship had hit Admiral Graf Spee three times ; one shell penetrated her main armour belt and narrowly missed detonating in one of her engine rooms , but the most important one disabled her oil @-@ purification equipment . Without it , the ship was unlikely to be able to reach Germany . Several days later , unable to be repaired and apparently confronted by powerful Royal Navy reinforcements , Admiral Graf Spee was scuttled in Montevideo harbour . 
 Exeter made for Port Stanley for emergency repairs which took until January 1940 . She was repaired and modernised at Devonport Dockyard between February 1940 and March 1941 ; Captain <unk> Beckett relieved Bell on 12 December 1940 . On 10 March 1941 , the day Exeter was due to be re @-@ commissioned , Beckett died at Saltash Hospital from complications resulting from surgery related to injuries received earlier in his career . His replacement was Captain Oliver Gordon . On returning to the fleet , she was engaged on escort duty for Atlantic convoys , including the escort of Convoy WS @-@ 8B to the Middle East during the chase for the German battleship Bismarck . After the start of the Pacific War in December 1941 , the ship was transferred to the Far East . 
 Upon her arrival at Singapore on 13 January 1942 , Exeter was assigned to the ABDACOM naval force that was intended to defend the Dutch East Indies ( Indonesia ) from Japanese invasion . She spent the first several weeks of February escorting convoys in the East Indies . On 13 February , Allied reconnaissance aircraft spotted Japanese invasion convoys north of Bangka Island and the new commander of ABDA naval forces , Vice Admiral Conrad Helfrich of the Royal Netherlands Navy , was ordered to assemble the Allied Striking Force of Exeter and three Dutch and one Australian light cruisers at Oosthaven on the morning of 14 February . Escorted by six American and three Dutch destroyers , the force departed that afternoon . The Dutch Rear Admiral Karel Doorman , commanding the force , took his ships through the Gaspar Strait and then northwest towards Bangka Island . While passing through the strait , the Dutch destroyer Van Ghent struck a rock in poor visibility and another Dutch destroyer was tasked to take off her crew . The Japanese spotted the Allied ships around 08 : 00 and repeatedly attacked them . The first was a group of seven Nakajima B5N " Kate " torpedo bombers from the light carrier Ryūjō that attacked Exeter with bombs around 10 : 30 . The blast from a near miss badly damaged her Walrus , but the ship was only damaged by splinters . They were followed shortly afterwards by a group of 23 Mitsubishi G3M " Nell " bombers from the <unk> Air Group that inflicted no damage as they dropped their bombs from high altitude . Another group of six B5Ns attacked without effect at 11 : 30 . 
 The repeated aerial attacks persuaded Doorman that further progress was unwise in the face of Japanese aerial supremacy and he ordered his ships to reverse course and head for Tanjung Priok at 12 : 42 . The attacks continued as 27 G3Ms of the <unk> Air Group then bombed from high altitude . Seven more B5Ns attacked fruitlessly at 14 : 30 ; a half @-@ dozen more followed an hour later . The final attack was made by 17 Mitsubishi G4M " Betty " bombers of the Kanoya Air Group shortly before dark . The Japanese attacks were almost entirely ineffectual , with no ship reporting anything more than splinter damage . In return Allied anti @-@ aircraft fire was moderately effective with most of the attacking bombers damaged by shell splinters . In addition one G4M crashed while attempting to land and another was badly damaged upon landing . 
 = = = = First Battle of the Java Sea = = = = 
 On 25 February , Helfrich ordered all available warships to join Doorman 's Eastern Striking Force at Surabaya . Exeter and the Australian cruiser Perth , escorted by three British destroyers , Jupiter , Encounter , and Electra , set sail at once , leaving behind one Australian cruiser and two destroyers that were short of fuel . After they had arrived the following day , Doorman 's entire force of five cruisers and nine destroyers departed Surabaya at 18 : 30 to patrol off Eastern Java in hopes of intercepting the oncoming invasion convoy which had been spotted earlier that morning . The Japanese were further north than he anticipated and his ships found nothing . His own ships were located at 09 : 35 on the following morning , 27 February , and were continuously tracked by the Japanese . Doorman ordered a return to Surabaya at 10 : 30 and his ships were attacked by eight bombers from the Kanoya Air Group at 14 : 37 . They claimed to have made two hits on Jupiter , but actually missed the British destroyer . Just as his leading ships were entering harbour , he received reports of enemy ships 90 miles ( 140 km ) to the north and Doorman ordered his ships to turn about to intercept them . 
 Aware of Doorman 's movements , the Japanese commander , Rear Admiral Takeo Takagi , detached the convoy 's two escorting destroyer flotillas , each consisting of a light cruiser and seven destroyers , to intercept the Allied ships in conjunction with his own pair of heavy cruisers , ( Nachi and Haguro ) , which were escorted by a pair of destroyers . His heavy cruisers opened fire at long range at 15 : 47 with little effect . The light cruisers and destroyers closed to ranges between 13 @,@ 000 and 15 @,@ 000 yards ( 12 @,@ 000 and 14 @,@ 000 m ) and began firing Type 93 " Long Lance " torpedoes beginning at 16 : 03 . All of these torpedoes failed to damage their targets , although one torpedo hit Exeter and failed to detonate at 16 : 35 . Three minutes later , Haguro changed the course of the battle when one of her shells penetrated the British ship 's starboard aft twin four @-@ inch gun mount before detonating in the forward boiler room , knocking six of her boilers off @-@ line and killing 14 of her crew . The ship sheered out of line to avoid another torpedo and slowed , followed by all of the trailing cruisers . Perth laid a smoke screen to protect Exeter and the Allied ships sorted themselves into separate groups as they attempted to disengage . Exeter was escorted by one Dutch and all three British destroyers in one group and the other cruisers and the American destroyers formed the other group . The Japanese did not initially press their pursuit as they maneuvered to use their torpedoes against the crippled Exeter , which could only make 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ; 5 @.@ 8 mph ) , and her escorts . 
 The Japanese began launching torpedoes beginning at 17 : 20 at ranges of 10 @,@ 000 to 18 @,@ 500 yards ( 9 @,@ 100 to 16 @,@ 900 m ) , but they all missed . For some reason , two Japanese destroyers continued to close before firing their torpedoes at 6 @,@ 500 yards ( 5 @,@ 900 m ) and Encounter and Electra pulled out of line to counter @-@ attack . They engaged Asagumo and <unk> at close range as they closed . Asagumo was damaged by Electra , but the Japanese ship sank the British destroyer at 17 : 46 . In the meantime , Exeter continued south to Surabaya , escorted by Encounter and the Dutch destroyer Witte de With . Doorman 's repeated , unsuccessful , and ultimately fatal , attempts to reach the transports concentrated the Japanese on the task of protecting the transports and allowed the damaged British cruiser to reach harbour . 
 = = = = Second Battle of the Java Sea = = = = 
 The following day , after making temporary repairs and refuelling , Exeter , escorted by Encounter and the American destroyer Pope , was ordered to sail to Colombo , Ceylon , via the Sunda Strait . They departed on the evening of 28 February , but were intercepted by the Japanese heavy cruisers Nachi , Haguro , Myōkō and Ashigara and the destroyers Akebono , Inazuma , <unk> and Kawakaze on the morning of 1 March . About 08 : 00 , the British ships spotted two of the Japanese cruisers , one of which launched its spotting floatplanes . Two others were seen closing in , and both launched their aircraft before opening fire at about 09 : 30 . The Allied ships laid smoke and turned away to the east with the Japanese to their north and south . Exeter was able to reach a speed of 26 knots ( 48 km / h ; 30 mph ) before the first hit on her again detonated in a boiler room and knocked out all power around 11 : 20 . The Japanese destroyers closed in and fired a total of 18 torpedoes , which made a number of hits . Two of those from from the destroyer Inazuma were claimed as hits and Exeter quickly capsized and sank . Encounter and Pope were also lost ; Pope temporarily escaped the initial melee , only to be sunk by B5Ns a few hours later . 
 The Japanese rescued 652 of Exeter 's crew , including her captain , who became prisoners of war . Of these men , 152 died in captivity . The wreck was located and positively identified in February 2007 . Exeter lies in Indonesian waters , at a depth of about 200 feet ( 61 m ) , 90 miles ( 140 km ) north of Bawean Island – some 60 miles ( 97 km ) from the sinking position given by Gordon after the war . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 666 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 666 ( PA 666 ) is an east – west state route located in northwest Pennsylvania . The western terminus of the route is at U.S. Route 62 ( US 62 ) in the Hickory Township municipality of East Hickory , and its eastern terminus is at US 6 in the hamlet of Sheffield in the township of the same name . It cuts through most of Allegheny National Forest , and is therefore sparsely populated , with the largest settlement along the road being Endeavor . Its official name is the David <unk> Memorial Highway . 
 The route was assigned in the 1928 numbering of State Routes in Pennsylvania . The highway originally ended in Nebraska until being extended southward along other streets . The route was realigned in 1946 onto its present routing . The highway has remained the same since . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = East Hickory to Old PA 666 = = = 
 Pennsylvania Route 666 begins at an intersection with US 62 along the banks of the Allegheny River in East Hickory . The route progresses eastward , intersecting with East Hickory Road , a dead end street that is part of old US 62 . With trees and some homes surrounding the highway , PA 666 continues out of East Hickory and into Hickory Township . The highway heads into Queen , intersecting with two dead @-@ end streets before turning to the southeast . The route quickly leaves Queen , entering a heavily forested area . The trees around the highway are very dense and surround the highway for several miles . The southeastern motion that PA 666 was following becomes a steady east , with the highway making several changes in its direction . There is an intersection with a local road , Yellow Hammer Road , which has access to a small amount of civilization . The road however , is a loop , and merges in soon after . The route continues farther through the dense forestry , intersecting with a woods road . PA 666 continues farther to the southeast , entering a break in the dense forestry . 
 The break in forestry is short , and PA 666 continues , now fully to the south . There is another break as the highway approaches the intersection of Balltown Road and Dutch Hill Road . Hazelton Hill Road parallels to the south along the eastern @-@ direction highway and both turn southward soon afterward . When PA 666 turns back into the heavily forested area , Hazleton Hill Road turns in the other direction and the parallel ends . There is a small break in the forestry , for some homes , and the highway then begins to make its loop to the north . Paralleling the Tionesta Creek PA 666 intersects with some local roads , Pierson Hill and Salmon Creek Roads . After the bend in <unk> , Route 666 follows a short segment of an old alignment , deemed on maps as Old PA @-@ 666 . PA 666 now makes a steady path to the northeast along the <unk> , and the dense forests return . The northeastern progression begins to change , and the highway begins a more northward direction . Continuing through the forestry , Route 666 begins to change to a more eastern direction , and in the process , leaving the <unk> . 
 = = = Old PA 666 to Sheffield = = = 
 The eastern progression begins to convert to another northeastern one , eventually moving into Balltown . In Balltown , there is a break in the forestry for a small area of civilization . The route heads northward , running along the riverbanks once again , and enters the small municipality of <unk> , Pennsylvania . PA 666 leaves <unk> and makes a U @-@ shaped turn through the forestry . In the U is the municipality of Minister . Afterwards , the route 's progression is mainly eastward . The route , running along the riverbanks , turns to the southward , until turning eastward once again . The route continues into Howe Township and quickly leaves , turning to the northeast and into the dense forestry . Several miles later , the route actually makes a northwestern progression , but it is for a short time , and the highway goes back to a normal northeastern progression . 
 There are more and more gaps in the forestry and the highway enters Barnes . In Barnes , PA 666 intersects with PA 948 's northern terminus . After Barnes , the route becomes more civilized , and the highway passes more homes . Nearing its end , PA 666 re @-@ enters the forested area , leaving quickly . The highway terminates in Sheffield Township , at an intersection with US 6 . 
 = = History = = 
 PA 666 was assigned in the mass numbering of state routes in 1928 . This routing of PA 666 from Barnes to Nebraska , small municipalities in Forest and Warren Counties . After remaining intact for thirteen years , the highway was extended to Newmansville to terminate at PA 36 and PA 208 . This southern extension is now Newmansville Road , three quadrant routes , and two township roads . In 1946 , PA 666 was extended westward to East Hickory , with the extension to Newmansville being decommissioned . 
 Several highways numbered " 666 " have experienced high rates of sign theft . According to a 2008 report , this appears to not be the case with PA 666 with a PennDOT spokesperson saying few signs have been stolen . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Effects of Hurricane Charley in South Carolina = 
 The effects of Hurricane Charley in South Carolina included $ 20 million ( 2004 USD ) in damage and 135 @,@ 000 power outages . Hurricane Charley lasted from August 9 to August 15 , and at its peak attained 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) winds , making it a strong Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . The storm made landfall in southwestern Florida at maximum strength , making it the strongest hurricane to hit the United States since Hurricane Andrew struck Florida twelve years before , in 1992 . 
 Before the storm , Governor Mark Sanford declared a state of emergency as Charley approached its final landfall and issued a mandatory evacuation for residents on barrier islands and in coastal locations . About 180 @,@ 000 people evacuated the Grand Strand . Peak winds in the state were clocked at 63 mph ( 101 km / h ) at the Isle of Palms . The storm spawned winds of 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) at Folly Beach and 51 mph ( 82 km / h ) in downtown Charleston . Numerous trees , tree limbs and electrical poles were knocked down in those regions . Flash flooding was also reported with rainfall peaking at over 7 in ( 180 mm ) . There were no fatalities . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Prior to the storm , a tropical storm watch was issued for locations from the Altamaha sound , Georgia to the South Santee River on August 12 . The next day , the watch was upgraded to a hurricane watch from the Altamaha sound to the South Carolina – Georgia border . As Charley approached the region , a hurricane warning was issued for the entire area . A tornado watch was issued eastward from a line extending from Aiken to Lancaster County . 
