 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Concentrate and Ask Again " was watched by an estimated 4 @.@ 3 million viewers in the United States on its initial broadcast , earning a 1 @.@ 6 rating . It was a 16 percent drop in viewership from the previous two Friday episodes , " Reciprocity " and " The Firefly " . With 7 @-@ day out time shifted viewings taken into account , over 6 @.@ 0 million viewers ultimately watched " Concentrate and Ask Again " , including a 56 percent increase in the 18 – 49 age group , the largest percentage gains of any other show of that week . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mixed to fairly positive reviews . Entertainment Weekly staff member Ken Tucker called " Concentrate and Ask Again " the completion of a trilogy of episodes that " bring together a lot of the show 's mythology . " However , he did not believe the main plot to be all that fascinating , commenting that it " could have passed for an episode of <unk> . " Instead , Tucker enjoyed the smaller details in the episode , such as the room full of items owned by William Bell ; he also praised guest actor Omid Abtahi 's " marvelously anguished " performance . 
 Carissa Pavlica from TV Fanatic noted , " ' Concentrate and Ask Again ' " did little to drive the overriding story forward , but it did a brilliant job of making me question everything . " Nonetheless , she commented that it " ... was nowhere near as intense as ' Reciprocity ' . " IGN writer Ramsey Isler did not think there was anything " particularly remarkable about the core elements of this story – it 's the same old formula that both Fringe and The X @-@ Files used frequently – but the episode has a generous helping of little revealing character elements sprinkled throughout . " Isler praised the final ten minutes for " provid [ ing ] some really interesting action " with Olivia 's ending of the case , and the revelation of Simon 's note in conjunction with Sam 's knowledge of the First People . He ultimately graded the episode 7 @.@ 5 / 10 . 
 Fearnet staffer Alyse Wax highlighted the episode 's opening scene in her review of the best television " kills " of 2011 . 
 = English Water Spaniel = 
 The English Water Spaniel is a breed of dog that has been extinct since the first part of the 20th century , with the last specimen seen in the 1930s . It was best known for its use in hunting waterfowl and for being able to dive as well as a duck . It is described as similar to a Collie or to a cross between a Poodle and a Springer Spaniel with curly fur and typically in a white and liver / tan pattern . 
 Pre @-@ dating the Irish Water Spaniel and thought to have been referred to by Shakespeare in Macbeth , it is believed to have genetically influenced several modern breeds of dog , including the American Water Spaniel , Curly Coated Retriever and the modern variety of Field Spaniel . It is unknown if the breed was involved in the creation of the Irish Water Spaniel . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1570 , Dr John Caius described the Water Spaniel . It has been suggested that Shakespeare also knew the breed " for he mentions the <unk> rug ' in Macbeth . " Furthermore , Shakespeare specifically mentions the breed in Act III Scene 1 of The Two Gentlemen of Verona when <unk> says of his love , " She hath more qualities than a water @-@ spaniel . " 
 The breed is mentioned specifically by name as early as 1802 , in Sportsman 's Cabinet , where it is described as having " hair long and naturally curled , not loose and shaggy " ; the description accompanied an engraving of a liver and white curly coated spaniel . This shows that they pre @-@ date the Irish Water Spaniel which was not developed as a breed until the 1830s . Unfortunately as the person credited with developing the Irish Water Spaniel , Justin McCarthy , left no written records , it is unknown if the English Water Spaniel was involved in its development . During the first half of the 18th century , the English Water Spaniel was used for duck hunting in East Anglia . 
 The Kennel Club initially had a class for " Water spaniels other than Irish " as no standard was specifically set up for the English Water Spaniel and the judging of this class was described as " chaos " by Hugh Dalziel in British Dogs : Their Varieties , History , Characteristics , Breeding , Management , And Exhibition . Writing in 1897 , Dalziel said of the breed , " I do not believe the breed is lost , but that scattered throughout the country there are many specimens of the old English water spaniel , which it only requires that amount of encouragement to breeding which it is in the power of show committees to give to perpetuate the variety and improve its form . " Dalziel bemoaned the fact that while the Irish Water Spaniel continued , the English Water Spaniel was allowed to quietly be absorbed into other Spaniel breeds . 
 The stud book of the Kennel Club also had a class for " Water spaniels other than Irish " , however only fourteen dogs were registered in the twelve years up to 1903 . This led some writers and judges of that time to believe that the English Water Spaniel was merely a cross of the Irish Water Spaniel as entrants in dogs shows in that same class do not match the description of the dog from earlier periods . Dogs awarded prizes as Water Spaniels during this period have been described as having " coats as flat as a Clumber , but with a bit of longish hair about the top of the skull . " 
 Writing in 1967 , author John F. Gordon stated , " After two centuries of breeding it is now extinct . None have been seen for over thirty years . " Descendant breeds of the English Water Spaniel are thought to include the American Water Spaniel , which was also developed using additional stock from the Irish Water Spaniel and the Flat Coated Retriever breeds . The Curly Coated Retriever is considered to have descended from the Poodle , the retrieving setter , the St. John 's water dog and the English Water Spaniel . Records for the origin of the modern Field Spaniel are more precise and show that one of the four progenitor dogs used in creating the breed was an English Water Spaniel @-@ Cocker Spaniel cross which was registered at the time as a Sussex Spaniel due to his liver colour . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 Very unlike the Irish Water Spaniel in appearance , the English Water Spaniel more closely resembled a curly @-@ haired version of the Springer Spaniel , with some traits of the Collie , poodle , and setter . The white and liver ( tan ) dog stood about 20 inches ( 51 cm ) tall and looked like a typical , lean , long @-@ legged spaniel with long ears and tail , a white underbelly , and a brown back , except that it had the coat of a water dog . 
 The English Water Spaniel was described as having a long and narrow head , with small eyes and ears that were long and covered in thick curls of fur . The body was moderately stout and barrel shaped , but not as much as that of the Field Spaniel . Its legs were long and straight with large feet . The dog varied in size with the larger varieties known as " Water Dogs " and the smaller as " Water Spaniels " . 
 Due to the English Water Spaniel 's colours of liver ( tan ) and white , it has been suggested that the breed may have been the source of the colours now found in the modern English Springer Spaniel and Welsh Springer Spaniel breeds . 
 = = Hunting = = 
 Paintings by Henry Bernard Chalon and Ramsay Richard Reinagle both show English Water Spaniels working with their masters hunting ducks . An engraving by Henry Thomas <unk> <unk> shows a slightly different looking English Water Spaniel , but also reinforces its area of work by again showing it while duck hunting . In The Sportsman 's Repository ( 1820 ) , the author advises that if an individual wishes to hunt ducks or any other type of waterfowl , then the hunter had best use an English Water Spaniel . 
 The breed is described as swimming and diving as well as the ducks themselves ; and they are intelligent enough to avoid being lured away from the nesting places . The author described the best variety of the breed to be those with long ears whose coat was white under the belly and around the neck but brown on the back . 
 = Nathan Drake ( character ) = 
 Nathan " Nate " Drake ( born Nathan Morgan ) is the protagonist of the Uncharted video game series , developed by Naughty Dog . He appears in all five games : Uncharted : Drake 's Fortune , Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves , Uncharted 3 : Drake 's Deception , Uncharted : Golden Abyss , and Uncharted 4 : A Thief 's End . He also appears in the motion comic prequel series Uncharted : Eye of Indra . He is played by actor Nolan North , who influenced Drake 's personality by ad @-@ libbing segments of the character 's dialogue . 
 Naughty Dog based Drake 's appearance and personality on daredevil Johnny Knoxville , actor Harrison Ford , and the heroes of pulp magazines , novels and films . To make him relatable , the character was dressed in jeans and a T @-@ shirt , and given an everyman persona ; he is strong @-@ willed , and often jokes and quips . The designers focused on giving him realistic reactions to his environment ; for example , he stumbles while running , barely clears objects during leaps , and recognizes the absurdity of the situations in which he finds himself . 
 The design and personality of Drake have drawn comparisons to other video game and film characters , such as Lara Croft and Indiana Jones . Many reviewers have called Drake a likable and believable character , and have noted that he is a rare example of a physically attractive character who is not over @-@ sexualized . 
 = = Character design = = 
 Illustrator and designer Kory Heinzen worked on pre @-@ visualization , concept and character design on the video game Uncharted : Drake 's Fortune , developed by Naughty Dog . Heinzen 's initial concept differed from the finished character . The production staff drew inspiration from the pulp adventure genre when creating the video games in the Uncharted series , and based Drake on the stereotypical characters of adventure films and novels , giving him wit , resourcefulness , and strong principles . Naughty Dog wanted to highlight Drake 's personality through his interactions with the environment during gameplay . To do this , they developed a wide range of animations for Drake , allowing him to display reactions and his snarky disposition in context . These animations were designed to be fluid and believable ; they removed any animation that did not promote this fluidity or took a large amount of time to execute . The blended animation system in the game , with more than 30 animations comprising one movement , was implemented to make Drake a more relatable character . 
 The Naughty Dog staff looked to several sources in creating Drake . His appearance and charisma were based on actor and daredevil Johnny Knoxville . Lead game designer Richard Lemarchand wanted Drake to reflect the " coolness and goodness " he saw in Knoxville . Series writer Amy Hennig described Drake as a gritty , charming mixture of actors Harrison Ford and Bruce Willis , with additional influence coming from romantic action @-@ adventure heroes , including Cary Grant : 
 ... we even went back to the earliest movie serials , movies from the ' 30s and the ' 50s , and the more recent revivals of the action @-@ adventure genre in the ' 80s , and even recently with movies like National Treasure . There are certain traits that a lot of those characters have in common – that irreverent , roguish sense of humor , that charm . 
 Lemarchand listed comic characters Doc Savage and Tintin , as well as Die Hard protagonist John McClane , as inspirations for the character . Drake 's physical prowess was modeled on that of Savage , and his personality inspired by the vibrant color and <unk> identity of Tintin . 
 Naughty Dog wanted Drake to embody the everyman archetype . E. Daniel Arey , former Naughty Dog creative director , stated that " there is a fine line between jerk and lovable rogue " , and that they developed Drake to be more human and accessible . " If a hero constantly shows their human side , " said Arey , " we relate and forgive any seeming overconfidence because we ’ ve all been there . " Neil Druckmann , lead designer of Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves , explained that Drake was meant to react to situations in the manner that the average player might . Hennig commented : 
 ... when we set out to do Uncharted , we decided we wanted to tackle one of these beloved action @-@ adventure games in the spirit of this whole tradition . We knew that in order to pull it off , we had to have a hero who was completely relatable , just a regular guy . So when people saw him and said " Why do I want to play a guy in t @-@ shirt and jeans " that was a deliberate move on our part , to say look , he 's just a guy . He 's just like you and me . 
 Josh Scherr , leader of the Drake 's Fortune story sequence team , said that they created Drake as an " ordinary guy " with no special powers . Instead , Drake became visibly nervous at times , barely cleared objects while jumping , and stumbled while running . The characterizations were meant to show Drake as a frail character . He is not a master of hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , and throws punches without style or skill . Sam Thompson , producer of Among Thieves , described Drake 's martial arts abilities as " fallible . " Sony Entertainment of America line producer Sam Thompson mused that Naughty Dog had created iconic characters before , including Crash Bandicoot . With Nathan Drake , however , the company wanted to produce a more average character , one who did not possess the same amount of confidence and who was more realistic and humble . 
 Nolan North , the voice actor who played Drake , had a large role in defining the character 's physical and vocal reactions . He speaks in a <unk> accent . In the Uncharted series , the actors were used for motion capture , and acted as if performing in a movie . Motion capture was done on a soundstage , and the dialog recorded during this process was used in the game . North was allowed to ad @-@ lib dialog and insert aspects of his own personality into the character . In naming the character , the development team considered many different choices , including Ethan , Samuel , and John . Matthew Drake was seriously contemplated , but received a poor reaction from those it was presented to . Eventually , Naughty Dog settled on the name Nathan for its ability to be shortened to Nate , and the perception that it sounded historical . Drake 's character design changed little between Drake 's Fortune and Among Thieves . 
 = = Attributes = = 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Drake has a distinct personality , as the creators did not want him to appear as a caricature or " cardboard cutout " . Hennig constantly elaborated Drake 's personality through in @-@ game dialogue and interactions with other characters , rather than exclusively through cutaway scenes . Drake reacts to events in a human @-@ like way , often commenting and complaining on the absurdity or difficulty of his situation . While traveling through chapters , Drake frequently makes sarcastic quips and taunts . Self @-@ educated in history and various languages , Drake is also highly intelligent . Matt Casamassina of IGN commented on the character 's interactions during gameplay that reveal Drake 's nature : " it 's lighthearted and amusing , but it also demonstrates that Nate is aware of how absurd his predicaments sometimes are . It 's a small , unimportant communication , but it makes sense that the two would behave exactly as they do . " 
 Drake says what he is thinking aloud , a feature designed to correlate with the likely thoughts and reactions of the player . Amy Hennig called Drake a " Die Hard guy that gets in there and just takes care of the situation ; ' the fly in the ointment ' . " Drake 's voice actor North was instructed to imbue his own personality into the character . 
 = = = Outward appearance = = = 
 Drake 's outward appearance is fairly generic , consisting of a simple white shirt and blue jeans and a gun holster on his back in the first game , and a brown henley in the second . He was deliberately costumed in a simple shirt and jeans to provide a " blank slate " on which the everyman persona could be imposed . The programmers designed a layered @-@ animation system to make Drake 's motions realistic by blending multiple poses and reactions together . This allowed a complex facial and wrinkle mapping system , which provided Drake more human emotional reactions . Drake 's physique is fairly fit , but not overly muscular . Drake 's appearance underwent minor changes in Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves . Hennig stated that Drake was skinnier than intended in the first game , and thus the designers bulked him up for the second . 
 Drake 's shirt is always tucked into his pants on only one side , an attribute which commentators have labeled the " half @-@ tuck " . The term , first coined by video game designer Tim Schafer , led to Naughty Dog altering Drake 's appearance to have his shirt almost tucked in from the front , and half tucked in at the back , an inside joke Naughty Dog co @-@ president Evan Wells labeled a " three @-@ quarters @-@ tuck . " The half @-@ tuck was part of a larger effort to ensure Drake 's design was asymmetrical . Tim Schafer commented " It was all super next @-@ gen , but the most next @-@ gen thing about it to me was Drake 's shirt . Check it out : Somehow it 's tucked in , and yet not tucked in , at the very same time . Of all the technical marvels contained in Uncharted , this was the one that really mystified me . " 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Main series = = = 
 = = = = Uncharted : Drake 's Fortune = = = = 
 In the 2007 video game Uncharted : Drake 's Fortune , Drake tracks a treasure located on a remote tropical island . As the game opens , Drake , accompanied by reporter Elena Fisher , recovers the coffin of his ( then assumed ) ancestor Sir Francis Drake , which he located from coordinates inscribed on a family heirloom : a ring Drake wears around his neck . The coffin contains Sir Francis Drake 's diary , which gives the location of El Dorado . Pirates attack and destroy Drake 's boat , but Drake 's friend Victor Sullivan rescues the two . When Sully and Drake follow the diary to the indicated spot , they learn that El Dorado is a large golden idol that the Spanish had tried to remove from the island centuries ago . After finding a U @-@ boat , mercenaries led by Gabriel Roman intercept Drake , Fisher and Sully . Sully is shot but Drake manages to escape to an island where Sir Francis Drake 's diary claims the idol is located . On the way to the island , anti @-@ aircraft fire forces Elena and Drake to bail out of the airplane and they are separated . Drake heads toward an old Spanish fort to find Elena . Though briefly captured , Drake and Elena reunite and flee to the old customs house on the island . There they find that Sully has survived his gunshot wound . Drake discovers that the idol is located near the custom house , and finds and rescues Sully . Drake realizes that the idol is cursed , and that it turned the Spanish and Kriegsmarine searching for it into zombified monsters . Drake attempts to stop Roman from removing the idol from the island , and arrives in time to see <unk> Navarro , a man hired by Roman , find the statue . Navarro tricks Roman into becoming cursed . Drake then jumps onto the statue and rides it as it is airlifted onto a boat in the bay . There he defeats Navarro and manages to sink the idol to the bottom of the ocean . Sully arrives and Elena and Drake leave the island with several chests of treasure , after displaying affection towards each other . 
 = = = = Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves = = = = 
 Drake returns as the protagonist of Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves in 2009 . A wealthy benefactor hires Drake , Harry Flynn , and Chloe Frazer to steal a small lamp from a Turkish museum . Drake and Chloe , having dated in the past , renew their romance behind Flynn 's back . Once in the museum , Flynn betrays Drake and Drake is imprisoned . Drake theorizes that the true goal of the theft was to discover the location of Marco Polo 's lost fleet . Flynn brings the information obtained from resin found in the lamp to his employer , war criminal Zoran Lazarevic , who seeks the <unk> Stone that the fleet was supposedly transporting . Once Chloe and Sully secure Drake 's release , Drake follows Lazarevic , and discovers that the fleet did not possess the stone , but had clues to the location of Shambhala . Drake travels to Nepal to find the next clue , although Lazarevic has initiated a civil war in the region in order to find the temple containing the clue . In the city , he finds Elena and her cameraman Jeff , the latter of which is executed by Lazarevic . Drake pursues Lazarevic and then discovers the key to Shambhala , but the train they are traveling on explodes , leaving Drake stranded . Drake loses consciousness after finding the key ( a <unk> ) and awakens in a Tibetan village . Here , he finds Karl Schäfer , an SS officer who had led an Ahnenerbe expedition to Shambhala , though he had killed them all to stop the Nazis from obtaining the power in the city . Tenzin , a man who speaks no English , leads Drake through an ice cave , where they are attacked by giant horned monsters . Lazaravic attacks the village , kidnapping Schäfer . Drake and Elena track Lazaravic to a monastery , where they find the entrance to Shambhala . Once inside , they discover that the monsters are guardians of the city . Drake and Elena are apprehended by Lazaravic but escape him when the guardians attack . Drake confronts Lazaravic at the Tree of Life , the sap of which comprises the <unk> stone . Drake wounds Lazaravic , leaving the guardians to kill him , and returns to the village , where he and Elena kiss and begin a relationship . 
 = = = = Uncharted 3 : Drake 's Deception = = = = 
 2011 's third installment of the franchise , Uncharted 3 : Drake 's Deception , has Drake searching for the lost city of Iram of the Pillars , located in the Rub ' al Khali Desert . During the gap between the two games , Drake and Elena married , but then became estranged and are now separated . It is revealed in this game that Drake 's past is more mysterious than the player is led to believe . It eventually transpires that Drake is not his real last name ( his real last name , Morgan , is not revealed until Uncharted 4 ) and he was raised in a Catholic orphanage from the age of five . His mother committed suicide and his father handed the child over to the state . He ran away from the orphanage and travelled to Colombia , where , at the age of 14 , he acquired Francis Drake 's ring ( which he has referred to as a family heirloom in the first game ) by stealing it from a museum . This led to him teaming up with Victor Sullivan for the first time . With the assistance of Sully , Chloe , and Charlie Cutter , Nate steals valuable historical clues from a mysterious organization led by Katherine Marlowe and her assistant Talbot . They travel to France and Syria where they find clues leading them to Yemen , where Drake reluctantly enlists the help of Elena . They find a celestial map that shows the location of Iram . However , Sully is kidnapped by Marlowe and Talbot , prompting Drake to save him by boarding one of Marlowe 's cargo planes . The plane crashes in the Rub ' al Khali after a shoot @-@ out ensues but Drake survives . After wandering the desert for days , a group of horsemen , led by Salim , rescue Drake and take him back to their encampment . Salim explains to Drake they must stop Marlowe and Talbot from reaching the lost city so they will not get their hands on the hallucinogenic power of the Djinn . Drake and Salim rescue Sully from Marlowe 's caravan and reach the city . Drake and Sully destroy the winch pulling the brass vessel containing the Djinn from the waters causing the whole city to collapse . Marlowe is killed in quicksand and Drake shoots Talbot before he can stab Sully . Drake and Sully escape the sinking city and reunite with Elena back at Yemen . Drake and Elena appear to resolve their marriage and they fly back home on their new sea plane . 
 = = = = Uncharted 4 : A Thief 's End = = = = 
 The fourth and final entry in the Uncharted series , Uncharted 4 : A Thief 's End , was showcased at E3 2014 , during Sony 's press conference . A trailer features a wounded Drake washing ashore an island . He rises , grabs his gun , and checks its ammo before walking into a jungle @-@ like area , as the camera pans to show hanging cages with skeletons inside . The trailer also features a conversation between Drake and Sully , where Drake asks for Sully 's help , having seemingly just laid out a plan . Sully warns Nate against it , but Nate responds that he has no choice , and asks if he can count on Sully one last time , who confirms that he can . A Thief 's End takes place three years after the events of Drake 's Deception . Drake has retired from fortune hunting , and is seemingly still married to Elena , as he still wears his ring in the trailer , but is dragged back into the profession by his estranged older brother , Sam Drake ( voiced by Troy Baker ) , after the latter discovers a lead to the semi @-@ mythical anarchist colony of <unk> and with it , the possible location of the treasure stolen by the legendary pirate captain Henry Avery . 
 = = = Other games = = = 
 Drake stars in 2012 's Uncharted : Golden Abyss , which is released on Sony 's PlayStation Vita . The game 's events take place sometime before those of Drake 's Fortune , though developers have stated that it is not a prequel to Drake 's Fortune but rather a separate original story . Nathan Drake was also on the shortlist for being a guest character in Street Fighter x Tekken , however the idea was scrapped . 
 Drake is a playable character in PlayStation All @-@ Stars Battle Royale . Nathan 's rival in the game is Sly Cooper , the reason being that Drake found pages of Sly 's book the <unk> <unk> and at the start of his storyline was on a desert island with Sully similar to that found on Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves . When Drake reaches the boss arena , he starts to decipher the pages of the <unk> <unk> , then Sly appears and explains he 's the rightful owner of the pages that Nathan possesses . Drake refuses and Sly mocks his abilities in an attempt to intimidate him , as a result Drake responds insultingly and the two battle . After defeating the boss in the game , Nathan returns to the same island as before and using the All @-@ Star Power he obtained from the boss , he greatly enhanced Sully 's plane , as the screen turns to black , Drake randomly says ' I punched a chicken ' . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Uncharted : Eye of Indra is a 2009 prequel series of motion comics . Their events occur before the first game , but the series was released after the second . In order to raise the money to find Sir Francis Drake 's coffin , Nathan Drake works for an American turned Indonesian crime boss named Daniel Pinkerton . Drake seeks the fabled Eye of Indra in India , where he meets Eddy Raja – who appears in the first game – and Drake becomes romantically involved with Raja 's sister , Rika Raja . 
 = = Merchandise and promotion = = 
 In 2007 , Sony placed promotional material in Empire stressing Drake 's everyman personality and showcasing his similarity to adventure film characters . Naughty Dog released an airsoft replica of Nathan Drake 's gun , a Beretta <unk> . 
 Shortly before the 2009 release of Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves , four urban vinyl toys based on Nathan Drake were released . Erick Scarecrow , founder of ESC Toys , designed the dolls in a number of colors ; only 2500 were released worldwide . Reviewers were not enthusiastic about the design , and Luke Plunkett of Kotaku commented , " while none of them have names , it appears there 's Drake , Hellboy Drake , Berlin Nightclub Drake and Radioactive Drake . " 
 In February 2016 , Naughty Dog announced the release of a 7 @-@ inch Nathan Drake action with articulated joints and an arsenal of gear and accessories . This action figure is being made by the toy company National Entertainment Collectibles Association , also known as NECA . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Nathan Drake has attracted mainly positive reviews , many focusing on his likability . Tom Cross of Gamasutra called Drake a " lovable jerk " who is " light , flippant , and just plain fun " , calling him a perfect caricature of a scoundrel . Stephen Totilo of Kotaku remarked that : " the short take is that Nathan Drake has attitude without being a jerk , and he cheerfully but woefully gets in over his head . This helps make him charming rather than annoying . " Comparing Drake to a similar character , Matt Casamassina at IGN claimed : " Nathan Drake , the hero in Naughty Dog 's Uncharted 2 , is more realistic , funny , charming , likable and altogether human in 30 minutes than Leon S. Kennedy is through an entire career of Resident Evil games . " Rush Frushtick at UGO admitted that Drake may appear to be " a dick " , but that he was " a likable dick " . GamesRadar listed Nathan as one of the 25 best new characters of the decade , contrasting him with characters like Halo protagonist Master Chief and Marcus Fenix of the Gears of War series in that unlike them , Drake is never in control of the situation . Empire also included Drake on their list of the 50 greatest video game characters , ranking him as 22nd . Nathan Drake is also seen as a PlayStation mascot . 
 Commenting on Drake 's " everyman " persona , Tom Hoggins of the Daily Telegraph called the character 's vulnerability " endearing " , while Chad Sapieha of The Globe and Mail labeled him " one of the most expressive video game characters ever created . " However , Ben Kuchera of Ars Technica criticized the " everyman " persona , stating that Drake was like numerous other characters , and lacked individuality . Develop 's Owain <unk> further criticized Drake 's blandness , doubting whether a player could adequately describe him as a character . Dan Hsu of Bitmob wrote that , though other characters like Master Chief may stand out more , Drake came across as an " old pal " . 
 Drake 's physical attractiveness has been another area of commentary , with at least one reviewer declaring a man crush for him . Drake has been described as " dreamy " , and a " handsome , charismatic hero . " Claudia Black , voice of Chloe Frazer from Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves , admitted having a crush on Drake as well . Drake has been cited as an example of a male character who , while attractive , is not over @-@ masculine . One commentator pointed out : " Very few of our protagonists ( Nathan Drake and Alan Wake to name a few exceptions ) depict men in what I would call a non @-@ degrading manner . " Steve McGarvey of GameSpy wrote that Drake was : " hardly oozing with machismo compared to the likes of most gaming protagonists " . Drake 's attractiveness drew criticism from Meagan Marie of Game Informer , who stated that he did not : " stand out much among the crowd of other ideally proportioned and intentionally unblemished gaming icons . " GameDaily named Drake the third greatest gaming hunk . GamesRadar named Drake " Mister 2007 " , stating that he was not picked just because they could " stare at his ass for hours on end " , but because he is heroic and has a " winning attitude " . In 2014 , La Nueva España included him the top ten sexiest video game characters of both genders . 
 The good sales of the Uncharted series and the growing identification of Drake with the PlayStation 3 console have led some to claim he is now a de facto mascot for the PlayStation 3 . Adam Hartley at TechRadar UK claimed , that : " throaty @-@ voiced protagonist Nathan Drake is the rightful heir to the ' PlayStation Hero ' crown " , while Now Gamer claimed Drake as the new PlayStation 3 poster boy . Drake was nominated for the " Most Compelling Character " award at the 2009 Inside Gaming Awards . 
 = = = Comparisons to other characters = = = 
 Nathan Drake has been compared to several other video game and film characters , most notably video game adventurer Lara Croft from the Tomb Raider franchise and film character Indiana Jones , due to the similarities between the characters and the narratives they appear in . Johnny Minkley of Eurogamer and Lee Ferran of ABC News called these associations " obvious " and " unavoidable " . In fact , Drake has been called a mixture of the two characters . Drake was hailed as the " new Lara Croft " after the Uncharted series sold well , and his similarity to Croft has earned him the moniker " <unk> " or " dude @-@ raider " . Michael Owen @-@ Brown of the The Advertiser remarked that Drake distinguished himself from Croft with his wit , while director of the Uncharted series Bruce Straley claimed that Drake had equaled Croft in popularity . CBS drew a strict distinction between Indiana Jones and Drake , pointing out that while Jones acts altruistically , Drake is in it for the profits . Avi Arad , producer of a planned Uncharted film , drew a similar conclusion , remarking that while Jones was always good , Drake is not necessarily the good guy . Designer Neil Druckmann stated that he believes Drake stands apart from Jones and Croft . Other reviewers have compared Drake to different characters , including Jack Colton from the film Romancing the Stone . North , who plays Drake , also voices The Prince in the 2008 video game Prince of Persia , and comparisons have been made between the two characters . The Prince has been described as a rougher , more abrasive form of Nathan Drake . 
 = = = Comparisons to living people = = = 
 An article published by Vice Media , which told of the then upcoming release of Uncharted 4 : A Thief 's End , included a lengthy interview with Dr. E. Lee Spence , who was described as " a pioneer in the field of underwater archaeology , a world @-@ renowned treasure hunter , and just about as close to an actual living , breathing Nathan Drake as you 're ever going to find . " In its URL <unk> billed Spence as the " real Nathan Drake . " 
 = X @-@ Flight ( Six Flags Great America ) = 
 X @-@ Flight is a steel roller coaster located at Six Flags Great America in Gurnee , Illinois . Designed and built by Bolliger & Mabillard , the ride opened as the fourth Wing Coaster in the world and the second in the United States on May 16 , 2012 . It replaced both the Splashwater Falls and Great American Raceway attractions . The 3 @,@ 000 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 910 m ) roller coaster features barrel rolls , high @-@ speed drops , and a signature fly @-@ through element , where the train narrowly misses a support structure – designed to look like an air traffic control tower – as it passes through an opening known as a keyhole element . 
 = = History = = 
 X @-@ Flight was announced on September 1 , 2011 . Six Flags Great America was the first park to announce plans for a Wing Coaster in the United States . Land clearing started in September 2011 on the former site of Splashwater Falls and the Great America Raceway . The first pieces of the track began to arrive in early October . 127 <unk> ( footers ) , ranging from 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) to 77 feet ( 23 m ) were dug into the ground . On January 27 , 2012 , the final piece of the lift hill was topped off . The trains for X @-@ Flight arrived at the park on March 2 , 2012 . In a Chicago Sun @-@ Times article in February , the park said they expect safety tests to start in early April . X @-@ Flight opened for " <unk> season pass holders " on the weekend of May 12 and opened to the public on May 16 . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 After departing from the station , which resembles an airplane hangar , the train immediately begins to climb the steep 120 @-@ foot ( 37 m ) chain lift hill . Upon reaching the top of the lift hill , the train enters the first element of the roller coaster , a Dive Drop . This element is similar to the Dive Drop 's found on The Swarm at Thorpe Park and GateKeeper at Cedar Point and consists of the train rotating 180 degrees into an upside down position before descending back to the ground . During this drop , the train reaches its top speed of 55 miles per hour ( 89 km / h ) . At the bottom of the first drop , riders get their picture taken . After the train exits the first drop , the train then enters a zero @-@ g @-@ roll before going through a cloud of fog . The train then makes a slight left turn before entering an Immelmann loop followed by a right turn over a pond . The train then leads into the second zero @-@ g @-@ roll over the main entrance of the ride . Following the roll , the train makes a left turn before going through an Inline twist . During this element , which is known as a keyhole , riders go through an actual airplane control tower ( which was retrieved from O 'Hare International Airport ) , giving the illusion the train will hit the tower . After going through the tower , the train goes through another near miss keyhole surrounded by a cloud of fog , before exiting the twist and making a tight right turn , passing by Demon 's corkscrews and last turn , before making a slight left upward turn leading into the brake run . The train then makes a 180 @-@ degree left turn into another set of brakes before entering the station . One cycle lasts about 1 minute and 15 seconds . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Manufacturer = = = 
 X @-@ Flight is a Wing Coaster model from Swiss manufacturer , Bolliger & Mabillard . It was the fifth B & M coaster for Six Flags Great America . X Flight joins the inverted roller coaster , Batman : The Ride , the hyper @-@ twister , Raging Bull and the flying roller coaster , Superman : Ultimate Flight , giving the park a total of four operating coasters from B & M. The park 's first B & M coaster , Iron Wolf was moved to Six Flags America at the end of the 2011 season . X Flight was the fourth Wing Coaster built and the second in the United States , preceded by Wild Eagle at Dollywood . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 X @-@ Flight operates with two steel and fiberglass trains . Each train has 8 cars with 4 seats per car ( 2 on each side of the track ) for a total of 32 riders per train . The colors of the train are red and black with over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraints . The restraints are similar to the restraints found on Superman : Ultimate Flight . 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel track is approximately 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) in length and the height of the lift is approximately 120 feet ( 37 m ) . The track is colored red while the supports are black . 
 = = Reception = = 
 X @-@ Flight has received a mix of positive and negative reviews . Doug George from the Chicago Tribune stated the ride is very smooth with " rolls , dives and inverted , eye @-@ bugging flips . " However , he stated that the ride is pretty short and with only one train running the course at a time , the wait time can reach as long as other popular attractions at the park . " The Coaster Critic " reviewed the ride and stated that the theming is very well done , especially the keyhole element . He said the different seating set up encourages re @-@ rides because of the different experience on each side of the train . Overall , he gave the ride a 9 out of 10 because of the " riding position , loops , and interactions or near @-@ misses . " 
 = = Awards = = 
 = 2011 Orange Bowl = 
 The 2011 Discover Orange Bowl was a postseason college football bowl game between the Virginia Tech Hokies and the Stanford Cardinal on Monday , January 3 , 2011 , at Sun Life Stadium in Miami Gardens , Florida . Stanford defeated Virginia Tech 40 – 12 . The game was part of the 2010 – 2011 Bowl Championship Series of the 2010 NCAA Division I FBS football season and was the concluding game of the season for both teams . The game , the 77th edition of the Orange Bowl , was televised in the United States on ESPN and the broadcast was seen by an estimated 8 @.@ 23 million viewers . 
 Virginia Tech was selected to participate in the Orange Bowl after an 11 – 2 regular season that culminated with a 44 – 33 win in the 2010 ACC Championship Game . Stanford was picked as the other half of the matchup following an 11 – 1 campaign that included the school 's best @-@ ever regular @-@ season record . That performance earned the Cardinal a No. 4 ranking in the BCS Poll and the automatic bid to a BCS game that accompanies a top @-@ 4 ranking of a second school in a conference other than the champion . In the weeks before that game , media attention focused on both teams ' turnarounds from historical difficulties and the performance of Stanford quarterback Andrew Luck . The game also was the first Orange Bowl not sponsored by FedEx in 21 years , ending the longest @-@ running title sponsorship deal among the major bowls . 
 The game kicked off at 8 : 39 pm in warm weather , and Stanford scored first , a touchdown , with its third offensive possession . Virginia Tech briefly took the lead with a safety followed by a touchdown of its own , but Stanford restored a 13 – 12 advantage before halftime . In the second half , Stanford pulled away from Virginia Tech as it scored 13 points in the third quarter and 14 in the fourth while holding the Hokies scoreless . 
 In recognition of his performance during the game , Stanford quarterback Andrew Luck was named the game 's most valuable player . He set a Stanford bowl @-@ game record for touchdowns , and threw three of those scores to tight end Coby Fleener , who set a Stanford and Orange Bowl record with 173 receiving yards . Both teams made coaching changes after the game , as Stanford head coach Jim Harbaugh left the team to coach the National Football League 's San Francisco 49ers and Virginia Tech replaced several assistant coaches . Players from each team were selected in the 2011 NFL Draft . 
 = = Team selection = = 
 The Orange Bowl is one of five Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) bowl games that have been played at the conclusion of every college football season since 2006 . As defined by contract , the bowl matches the champion of the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) against an at @-@ large pick chosen by a special committee . On December 4 , 2010 , the Virginia Tech Hokies defeated the Florida State Seminoles in the 2010 ACC Championship Game , thus winning an automatic bid to the 2011 Orange Bowl . 
 The at @-@ large spot in the Orange Bowl was filled via a round @-@ robin selection procedure defined by the other Bowl Championship series games ( the Sugar , Fiesta , and Rose bowls ) and the automatic bids . If a game 's automatic bid team is selected for the BCS National Championship Game , it is allowed to select a replacement team . In the 2010 season , teams otherwise designated for the Rose Bowl and Sugar Bowl were picked for the national championship game . Following the two compensatory selections are the at @-@ large picks . The order of at @-@ large selections rotates annually among the BCS bowls . 
 For the January 2011 games , the Sugar Bowl selected first , followed by the Orange Bowl and Fiesta Bowl . The Sugar Bowl picked Ohio State , which left the Orange Bowl to decide between two teams contractually bound to appear in a BCS bowl game . These were Stanford , which was guaranteed a BCS bid by its No. 4 national ranking , and Connecticut , champion of the Big East Conference . Favoring Stanford 's potential to draw a large television audience , the Orange Bowl selected the Cardinal , leaving Connecticut to the Fiesta Bowl . 
 = = = Stanford = = = 
 The Stanford Cardinal began the 2010 season after going 8 – 5 in 2009 under freshman quarterback Andrew Luck . The 2009 season saw the Cardinal defeat eighth @-@ ranked Oregon and No. 9 USC en route to breaking a seven @-@ year bowl game drought with an appearance in the 2009 Sun Bowl against Oklahoma . Stanford changed several position coaches and its defensive strategy in the offseason , and though the Cardinal returned 17 of 24 possible players from the previous year 's starting lineup , few believed the Cardinal would be among the best teams in the country . In the annual preseason poll of media members covering the Pacific @-@ 10 , Stanford was picked to finish fourth in the 10 @-@ team conference . Nationally , Stanford appeared in the " also receiving votes " categories of the preseason polls . In the AP Poll , the team was 27th ; in the coaches ' poll , the Cardinal was 32nd . 
 The Cardinal opened the season by defeating Football Bowl Subdivision team Sacramento State , then beat conference opponent UCLA in the first Pacific @-@ 10 game of the season . The win over Sacramento State pushed Stanford to No. 25 nationally , and the win over UCLA raised Stanford to No. 19 , the rank it held when it defeated Atlantic Coast Conference foe Wake Forest 68 – 24 on September 18 . The following week , Stanford defeated Notre Dame as the nation 's No. 16 team , and the win raised the Cardinal to No. 9 . 
 On October 2 , No. 9 Stanford played No. 4 Oregon . The game was touted as a matchup between two of the top offenses in college football and was nationally televised . Stanford led 21 – 3 after the first quarter and 31 – 24 at halftime , but the Cardinal allowed 28 unanswered points in the second half and lost to Oregon , 52 – 31 . Oregon later went on to play in the BCS National Championship game , and the defeat was Stanford 's only one of the season . The loss dropped Stanford to No. 16 in the polls , but the team rebounded the following week to defeat USC on a last @-@ second field goal , 37 – 35 . 
 The victory over USC began a winning streak , the best in Stanford football history since the time of the Korean War . The week after beating USC , Stanford defeated Washington State , moving to a 6 – 1 record for the first time since 1970 . The Cardinal rose to No. 13 nationally and defeated the University of Washington on October 30 . Against No. 15 Arizona , Stanford matched its previous season 's win total . On November 13 , Stanford defeated Arizona State in a closely fought 17 – 13 win that brought the Cardinal football team to 9 – 1 and its best record since 1951 . The following week , Stanford beat traditional rival California in The Big Game by a 48 – 14 score . It was the largest margin of victory in the rivalry since 1930 . Stanford 's final regular @-@ season game was against the Oregon State Beavers , and Stanford won the contest convincingly , 38 – 0 . The No. 4 and No. 5 nationally ranked teams had lost earlier the same day , lifting Stanford in the polls and in position for a Bowl Championship Series game berth . 
 = = = Virginia Tech = = = 
 The Virginia Tech Hokies entered the 2010 season after a 2009 campaign that saw the team finish 10 – 3 , including a season @-@ ending win in the 2009 Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl against the Tennessee Volunteers . Because of that season @-@ ending victory and the Hokies ' general good performance during the 2009 season , Virginia Tech was ranked No. 10 in preseason national polling . The Hokies ' first game of the season was a nationally televised contest against then @-@ No. 3 Boise State at FedEx Field near Washington , D.C .. Because the game was the first of the season to feature two top @-@ 10 teams , it received large amounts of media coverage . During the game , Virginia Tech fell behind 17 – 0 in the first quarter , but rallied to take a 21 – 20 lead early in the third quarter . The two teams traded the lead , alternating scoring drives until Boise State scored a touchdown with 1 : 06 remaining . Virginia Tech was unable to reply one final time , and Boise State earned a 33 – 30 victory . 
 The close loss discouraged the Virginia Tech players , who then had only five days to prepare for their next opponent , lightly regarded James Madison University . At Lane Stadium , Virginia Tech 's home field , James Madison upset the heavily favored Hokies , 21 – 16 . The loss was only the second time in college football history that a team ranked nationally was defeated by a team from the NCAA Football Championship Subdivision . In the wake of the loss , Virginia Tech fell from No. 13 to out of the polls entirely . 
 Following the loss , seniors on the football team held a players @-@ only meeting in an effort to rally the team . Players later recalled that meeting as the turning point in the team 's season . The next week , Virginia Tech earned its first win of the season , a 49 – 27 victory over East Carolina in Lane Stadium . The Hokies followed that by traveling to Boston College for a 19 – 0 win , their first shutout since 2006 . 
 The two victories were the start of a winning streak that saw the Hokies complete the regular season without another loss . Following Boston College , they defeated No. 23 NC State in its home stadium , 41 – 30 . They defeated nonconference opponent Central Michigan , then beat conference opponent Wake Forest and re @-@ entered the polls at No. 25 . Their position in the polls climbed with each opponent they defeated . They beat Duke as the No. 25 team , Georgia Tech as the No. 23 team , North Carolina as the No. 20 team and No. 23 Miami as the No. 16 team . The Miami victory clinched Tech the division championship and a slot in the ACC championship game , but the Hokies still won their final previously scheduled game , the annual Commonwealth Cup rivalry against Virginia . In the ACC Championship Game , Virginia Tech defeated Florida State 44 – 33 , clinching the ACC 's automatic bid to the Orange Bowl . 
 = = Sponsor change = = 
 In 2008 , sports channel ESPN won the right to broadcast Bowl Championship Series games between 2011 and 2014 . In compensation , it agreed to pay the BCS $ 125 million per year , more than a competing bid from Fox ( $ 100 million ) , which had been paying $ 82 @.@ 5 million per year for the contract that ended in 2010 . To balance the higher cost of broadcasting the games , ESPN demanded more money for title sponsorship of each game . Shipping company FedEx , which had become the Orange Bowl 's title sponsor in 1990 and was the longest continuous sponsor of any bowl game , balked at ESPN 's increased demands — about $ 20 million per year and required advertising outside the Orange Bowl — and ended its sponsorship . 
 Citi , the title sponsor of the Rose Bowl , likewise ended its sponsorship over the increased cost . ESPN immediately began pursuing an alternative title sponsor for each game . Candy manufacturer The Hershey Company was an early possibility for the Orange Bowl , and the company considered titling the game the Reese 's Orange Bowl , but negotiations fell through . In August , ESPN reached a deal with credit card company Discover Financial to make the game the Discover Orange Bowl through 2014 . 
 = = Pregame buildup = = 
 Pregame media coverage of the 2011 Orange Bowl focused on the manner in which the two teams involved had reversed their fortunes during the 2010 college football season . Stanford had its longest winning streak since 1991 its most wins in history , and was four years removed from a one @-@ win season , while Virginia Tech became the first team in college football history to win 11 consecutive games in a season after losing its first two . The two teams had never played each other , but they shared a common 2010 opponent , Wake Forest . Before the Orange Bowl , Wake Forest head coach Jim Grobe said he didn 't see much difference in quality . Another point of conversation was the poor performance of the ACC in nonconference games and Virginia Tech 's poor past performance against teams ranked in the top 5 . The Hokies had won just one of 27 games against teams in that category . Partially because of this factor , spread bettors favored Stanford by three points when the first odds were released December 10 , a margin that various organizations either kept constant or raised to 3 @.@ 5 points by the day of the game . It was the first time all season the Hokies were point spread underdogs . 
 Two nights before the game , Virginia Tech running back David Wilson and safety Antone Exum missed a 1 am curfew . As punishment , Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer suspended the two players for the first quarter of the Orange Bowl . 
 = = = Ticket sales and tourism = = = 
 Virginia Tech and Stanford each were allotted 17 @,@ 500 tickets to sell through their school box offices , but each school had problems selling that amount . For Stanford , whose primary campus is in California , the distance fans were required to travel was a major obstacle . Stanford head coach Jim Harbaugh said , " It will probably be more Hokie fans there than Stanford fans . That far away from home it probably could be a hostile environment for us . " 
 Orange Bowl organizers predicted that Virginia Tech fans , who were located closer to the site of the game , would be attracted by its proximity and the warm weather offered by southern Florida . Delta Air Lines added more flights from Virginia to Florida in anticipation . To entice more fans to attend , tourism officials planned to step up their advertising in order to boost the economic impact of the event , estimated in 2009 at $ 200 million . The advertising campaign was a difficult sell because the game was scheduled for the first Monday after New Year 's Day , the date when most American workers return to their jobs after the New Year . 
 Partially because of this fact , ticket sales were slow . By December 23 , Tech had sold just 6 @,@ 500 of its 17 @,@ 500 @-@ seat allotment , while Stanford fans had purchased 9 @,@ 000 tickets from their allotment . These figures increased slightly as the game day approached , but the schools were hampered by several factors . The tickets assigned to the schools were in less @-@ desirable seats , and many seats were available far more cheaply in the secondary market . In one example , an upper @-@ deck ticket sold by Virginia Tech cost $ 65 , while a similar ticket was available for $ 12 through an online ticket seller . The two schools were forced to purchase the remaining unsold tickets , costing each several hundred thousand dollars . 
 = = = Stanford offense = = = 
 Stanford 's offense was commanded by redshirt sophomore quarterback Andrew Luck , who completed 70 percent of his pass attempts , gaining 3 @,@ 051 yards , 28 touchdowns , and 7 interceptions . The touchdown mark was a Stanford single @-@ season record . He also gained 438 yards running the ball , setting a Stanford record for rushing by a quarterback , and his combined rushing and passing total set a record at Stanford for total offense . On December 13 , Luck finished second in the voting for the Heisman Trophy , the annual award given to the best player in college football that season . NCAA rules allow a player three years removed from high school to enter the NFL Draft , and even though he was only a sophomore in 2010 , he met the three @-@ year standard at the conclusion of the season . Before the Orange Bowl , media and fans speculated as to Luck 's likely choice . 
 Luck distributed his passes relatively evenly among his receivers . Doug Baldwin was the team 's leading receiver , with 56 receptions for 824 yards and 9 touchdowns during the regular season . Wide receiver and kick returner Chris Owusu , who played in only six games because of a knee injury , underwent arthroscopic surgery and was expected to play in the Orange Bowl . He was the team 's fourth @-@ leading receiver in terms of yardage , catching 24 passes for 394 yards and 3 touchdowns . 
 Stanford 's running game was led statistically by sophomore running back Stepfan Taylor , who garnered 1 @,@ 023 rushing yards and 15 touchdowns during the regular season . Before the game , Cardinal head coach Jim Harbaugh said he planned to give three other running backs — Tyler Gaffney , Jeremy Stewart , and Anthony Wilkerson — opportunities to carry the ball when Taylor was taken out of the game . 
 Virginia Tech 's success at blocking kicks during the 24 years of head coach Frank Beamer 's tenure caused Stanford to spend extra time in pregame practices on kick protection . 
 Because of his success in guiding Stanford 's offense , head coach Harbaugh was mentioned as a candidate for the vacant head coaching positions of other universities and National Football League teams . In the leadup to the Orange Bowl , however , Harbaugh refused to comment on any of the possibilities and said he wanted to focus on guiding his team to victory . Stanford players echoed that line . " We 've invested too much to let something like that distract us , " linebacker Shayne Skov said December 30 . 
 = = = Virginia Tech offense = = = 
 Virginia Tech quarterback Tyrod Taylor was the Atlantic Coast Conference Player of the Year and its championship game MVP . According to pregame media coverage , he presented a contrasting style to Stanford 's Luck . Taylor gained threw for 2 @,@ 521 yards and set a school record with 23 passing touchdowns , but was praised primarily for his physical mobility and ability to avoid defensive pressure , something Luck lacked . Taylor 's presence was a contributing factor to Tech 's offensive success in 2010 . Virginia Tech 's offense was the most productive since offensive coordinator Bryan Stinespring joined the team in 2001 . It set team records for points and total yards , and led the ACC in scoring and red @-@ zone efficiency . 
 In addition to Taylor 's success passing the ball , the Hokies also had a successful running offense . Running back Ryan Williams , who was limited for much of the season because of injury , had 473 rushing yards . Fellow running back Darren Evans , who missed the 2008 season because of injury , gained 817 yards and 11 touchdowns . Sophomore running back David Wilson gained 616 yards . Combined with Taylor 's rushing total , Virginia Tech gained 2 @,@ 543 yards and 30 touchdowns on the ground . 
 = = = Stanford defense = = = 
 In 2010 , Stanford 's defense improved under new defensive coordinator Vic Fangio , who was given credit for much of the team 's success in that department . At the end of the regular season , Stanford was first in the Pac @-@ 10 and 11th of 120 teams nationally in scoring defense ( allowing an average of 17 @.@ 83 points per game ) and 24th in total defense ( permitting 326 yards per game ) . In 2009 , Stanford was 69th in scoring defense ( 26 @.@ 5 ) and 90th in total defense ( 403 yards per game ) . A prominent player on Stanford 's defense was Owen Marecic , the only person in major league college football that season to play both offense and defense . On defense , Marecic accrued 45 tackles and 2 interceptions as a linebacker ; on offense , he gained 117 yards and 4 touchdowns as the team 's fullback . 
 Stanford 's leading tackler was linebacker Shayne Skov , who accumulated 72 tackles despite missing the first two games of the season . Before the game , Skov said one of Stanford 's priorities would be to contain the mobility of Tech quarterback Tyrod Taylor . " We need to try to keep him in the pocket and ( apply ) pressure the same way we have all year , " Skov said . 
 = = = Virginia Tech defense = = = 
 Virginia Tech 's defense was led by coordinator Bud Foster , who was named a candidate in several teams ' searches for a new head coach , but decided to remain at Virginia Tech as the buildup to the Orange Bowl continued . Heading into the game , Tech 's defense ranked 38th nationally in total yards allowed , its second @-@ worst performance since 1993 . Tech 's run defense was 58th , permitting an average 148 @.@ 9 rushing yards per game . On the positive side of things , Tech 's defense had the third @-@ most interceptions ( 22 ) in the country , and its scoring defense was 16th ( 19 @.@ 1 points per game ) . 
 Tech 's top performer on defense was sophomore cornerback Jayron Hosley , who had eight interceptions during the season — tied for most in the country — and was named a first @-@ team Walter Camp All @-@ American , a second @-@ team Associated Press All @-@ American , and a second @-@ team Sports Illustrated All @-@ American for that performance . Other top performers included linebackers Bruce Taylor and Stephen Friday , who had 15 @.@ 5 and 15 tackles for loss , respectively . 
 The Hokies played the Orange Bowl without starting linebacker <unk> Gibson , who fractured his shoulder in the second quarter of the ACC Championship Game . Gibson was fourth on the team in tackles with 66 . Replacing Gibson was redshirt freshman Tariq Edwards , who played only a few times before the Orange Bowl . The Hokies also returned a player from injury for the Orange Bowl . Linebacker <unk> Rivers , who had been predicted to be Tech 's starting middle linebacker , suffered a torn quadriceps tendon in offseason workouts , causing him to miss every game . Heading into the Orange Bowl , coaches were optimistic that he had healed enough to be able to play . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The 2011 Orange Bowl kicked off at 8 : 39 pm EST on January 3 , 2011 in Sun Life Stadium , Miami Gardens , Florida . Bowl officials said 65 @,@ 463 tickets were sold for the game , but many went unused , and that official figure was more than 9 @,@ 000 below stadium capacity . The game was televised on ESPN , and the announcers were Mike Tirico , Ron Jaworski , Jon Gruden and Michele <unk> . An estimated 8 @.@ 23 million viewers watched the broadcast , earning it a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 1 . That figure was the second @-@ lowest mark to date for a BCS game . For contributing teams to the Orange Bowl , the Atlantic Coast Conference and Pacific @-@ 10 each received large amounts of money to be divided among their members . Because the Pac @-@ 10 had two BCS teams , that conference received $ 27 @.@ 2 million from the BCS . The ACC , which had only Virginia Tech in a BCS bowl , received $ 21 @.@ 2 million . In the ACC , Virginia Tech received a somewhat larger share of the money as a reward for winning the conference : All other ACC teams received $ 1 @.@ 1 million ; Tech got $ 1 @.@ 7 million . Stanford received a similar amount , but the extra money was offset by the cost of sending 500 players , coaches , and staff to Miami . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Stanford returned the game 's opening kickoff to its 24 @-@ yard line , where the Cardinal offense began the game 's first possession . On the game 's first play , Stanford quarterback Andrew Luck ran 11 yards through the Virginia Tech defense for a first down . The success was short @-@ lived , however , as Stanford 's next three plays did not gain enough ground for another first down , and the team punted from its 37 @-@ yard line . Virginia Tech 's first possession was no more successful than Stanford 's had been . The Hokies ' offense entered the game at its 31 @-@ yard line after the punt , but went three @-@ and @-@ out after failing to gain a first down . 
 Tech punted , and Stanford 's offense returned to the field . The two teams traded possessions one more time , with Stanford turning the ball over on downs after a failed fourth @-@ down conversion attempt , and Virginia Tech returning the ball with another punt . Following the kick , Stanford 's offense began work from its 14 @-@ yard line with 8 : 08 remaining in the quarter . Two plays gained five yards , then Luck completed a 21 @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Doug Baldwin for just the second first down of the game . On the next play , Stanford running back Jeremy Stewart broke free of the Virginia Tech defense and ran down the field 60 yards for a touchdown . The score and subsequent extra point gave Stanford a 7 – 0 lead with 6 : 16 remaining in the quarter . 
 Stanford 's post @-@ score kickoff was downed for a touchback , and Virginia Tech 's offense began from its 20 @-@ yard line . The Hokies gained their initial first down of the game when quarterback Tyrod Taylor completed a 19 @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Danny Coale on the drive 's third play , but Tech was unable to gain another . Tech punted from its 43 @-@ yard line , and the kick was downed at the Stanford 5 @-@ yard line , where the Cardinal offense started work . Two rushing plays were stopped for no gain , then Luck attempted a passing play on third down . Because the line of scrimmage was so close to the Stanford goal line , Luck had to move into his own end zone to attempt the pass . Under pressure from the Virginia Tech defense , he threw to Derek Hall , who caught the ball in the end zone and was tackled before getting out . The result of the play was a safety , a 2 @-@ point defensive score for Virginia Tech . 
 Trailing 7 – 2 with 59 seconds remaining in the quarter , Virginia Tech 's offense received the ball at its 25 @-@ yard line following Stanford 's post @-@ safety free kick . On the first play of the subsequent drive , Taylor ran through the Stanford defense for 22 yards and a first down at the Tech 47 @-@ yard line . The second play of the drive , a 4 @-@ yard run by running back Darren Evans , pushed Tech into Stanford 's side of the field for the first time in the game , and was the final play of the quarter . With three quarters remaining , Stanford led Virginia Tech , 7 – 2 . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 The second quarter began with Virginia Tech in possession of the ball and facing second down on Stanford 's 49 @-@ yard line . On the first play of the quarter , Taylor completed a 10 @-@ yard throw to wide receiver Marcus Davis for a first down . Tech 's drive continued down the field , with running back Darren Evans receiving the ball on the majority of the plays . A 5 @-@ yard false start penalty against Virginia Tech was offset by a pass interference penalty two plays later by Stanford . Tech penetrated to the Stanford 10 @-@ yard line , but was stopped for no gain , then a loss , on two consecutive running plays . On third down , Taylor was pressured by the Stanford defense , scrambled out of the pocket , and threw an 11 @-@ yard touchdown pass to running back David Wilson an instant before Taylor stepped out of bounds . The score and subsequent extra point gave Tech its only lead of the game , 9 – 7 , with 10 : 22 remaining before halftime . 
 Virginia Tech 's post @-@ touchdown kickoff was returned to the Stanford 21 @-@ yard line , where the Cardinal offense began its first drive of the second quarter . On the first play of the drive , Luck completed a 14 @-@ yard pass to tight end Zach <unk> for a first down . Three consecutive short @-@ yardage plays gained another first down , then running back Jeremy Stewart escaped the Virginia Tech defense for a 24 @-@ yard gain , pushing the Cardinal into Virginia Tech territory . Three plays later , Luck again threw a long pass to <unk> , this time a 25 @-@ yard toss for Stanford 's second touchdown of the game . The subsequent extra point kick was blocked by Virginia Tech , but the touchdown 's six points were enough for Stanford to regain the lead , 13 – 9 . 
 Virginia Tech began its first full drive of the second quarter from its 25 @-@ yard line , but the Hokies went three @-@ and @-@ out . Stanford 's offense , beginning from its 33 @-@ yard line after the Tech punt , had its drive cut short when Luck threw an interception to Virginia Tech 's Jayron Hosley at the Tech 46 @-@ yard line . The Hokies advanced to the Stanford 30 @-@ yard line , but turned the ball over on downs after failing to gain one yard on fourth down . Stanford went three @-@ and @-@ out after the Hokies ' turnover and punted . Tech 's offense returned to the field at its 20 @-@ yard line with 49 seconds remaining until halftime . Using a hurry @-@ up offense and strategically calling timeouts to stop the game clock , Tech advanced the ball down the field . Taylor rushed for 14 yards , threw a 32 @-@ yard pass , and the Hokies were helped by a 10 @-@ yard holding penalty against Stanford . They advanced to the Stanford 20 @-@ yard line where , with time running out , they sent in kicker Chris <unk> . He completed a 37 @-@ yard field goal in the final play from scrimmage in the first half , making the game a one @-@ point affair , 13 – 12 . 
 = = = Halftime = = = 
 For the game 's halftime show , the Orange Bowl hosted American alternative rock band Goo Goo Dolls . Reviews criticized the performance for awkward staging and brevity , as the group performed only two songs . Middle school and high school dance squads also participated in the halftime show , <unk> on the field while the Goo Goo Dolls played . Pregame media coverage erroneously reported that Stanford 's marching band , which had been scheduled to perform , was banned from the field . The band had never been scheduled to perform at halftime ; each team 's marching band was allotted a six @-@ minute pregame performance . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 Because Stanford received the ball to begin the game , Virginia Tech received it to begin the second half . After starting from their 21 @-@ yard line , the Hokies went three @-@ and @-@ out . Following a Tech punt , Stanford 's first drive of the second half began at its 41 @-@ yard line . Two plays gained 13 yards and a first down , then Stanford began battering Virginia Tech with its passing offense . Luck threw four consecutive passes : the first was incomplete , but the next three went for 10 , 17 , and 18 yards , respectively . This gave Stanford a first down at the Tech one @-@ yard line . Three plays later , Owen Marecic crossed the goal line on a running play . The subsequent extra point was missed , and Stanford extended its lead to 19 – 12 with 8 : 47 remaining . 
 Virginia Tech 's second drive of the half began at its 41 @-@ yard line after a 31 @-@ yard kickoff return by Wilson . On the first play of the drive , Taylor was sacked for a 13 @-@ yard loss . He made good the lost yardage on the next play , however , completing a 42 @-@ yard throw to Danny Coale . From the Stanford 40 @-@ yard line , Taylor gained five yards on a running play , then attempted a long pass downfield . The throw was intercepted by Stanford 's Delano Howell at the Cardinal 3 @-@ yard line , returning Luck and the Stanford offense to the field . Luck needed only two plays to drive the length of the field and score a touchdown . A 56 @-@ yard run by Stepfan Taylor was followed by a 41 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Coby Fleener , and the following extra point kick was good , making the score 26 – 12 with 5 : 49 remaining . 
 Virginia Tech 's third drive of the quarter started from its 23 @-@ yard line . The first two plays of the drive were stopped for negative gain , then Taylor completed a 17 @-@ yard throw to Jarret Boykin for a first down . Tech couldn 't gain another first down , however , and punted to Stanford , which started from its 13 @-@ yard line . As in Virginia Tech 's previous drive , the Stanford offense began with a play that lost yardage , but it made up the failure with a running play that gained six yards and a passing play from Luck to Fleener for a first down at the Stanford 32 @-@ yard line . On the quarter 's final play , running back Tyler Gaffney gained seven yards . With one quarter remaining , Stanford led 26 – 12 . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 The fourth quarter began with Stanford in possession of the ball and facing second down and three from its 39 @-@ yard line . Two plays gained the Cardinal a first down , then Stanford committed a false @-@ start penalty that pushed its offense back five yards . Two plays later , however , Luck completed a 58 @-@ yard pass to Fleener , who made up the lost yardage and far more as he raced down the field for a touchdown . The following extra point granted Stanford a 33 – 12 lead with 12 : 28 remaining . 
 Following Stanford 's post @-@ touchdown kickoff , Virginia Tech 's offense took the field at its 25 @-@ yard line and embarked upon one of its longest drives of the game in terms of the number of plays . In the first seven plays of the drive , quarterback Taylor was the key component . He threw six passes , completing 3 for 39 yards , and ran once , for no gain . On the eighth play of the drive , running back Ryan Williams gained one yard , then committed a 15 @-@ yard personal foul penalty . Tech 's drive faltered after the penalty : Taylor threw an incomplete pass , then was sacked for a 16 @-@ yard loss , and the Hokies punted to the Stanford 28 @-@ yard line . 
 As it had in the third quarter , Stanford 's offense scored quickly . In only three plays , the Cardinal advanced 72 yards . A 34 @-@ yard run by Stepfan Taylor was followed by one stopped for no gain , then Luck completed a 38 @-@ yard throw to Fleener for Stanford 's second touchdown of the quarter . The score and extra point improved Stanford 's lead to 40 – 12 with 6 : 05 remaining in the game . Tech 's subsequent drive went three @-@ and @-@ out after Tyrod Taylor was sacked twice , and Stanford got the ball again at its 46 @-@ yard line . 
 With only 4 : 25 remaining and a lead well in hand , Stanford began running down the clock by executing running plays , which keep the game clock running as long as the ball carrier is downed in the field of play . Three rushes gained Stanford 16 yards , but the effectiveness of this strategy was undermined by a 15 @-@ yard personal foul penalty against Stanford that prevented the Cardinal from gaining a first down . Stanford also accepted a delay of game penalty in order to squeeze as much time as possible from the clock before punting back to Virginia Tech . The final drive of the game began from the Tech 11 @-@ yard line with 2 : 10 remaining , and quarterback Taylor controlled the ball on all of its five plays . Taylor completed a five @-@ yard pass to Coale , then ran for 18 yards and a first down . He was then sacked for a 15 @-@ yard loss , but gained much of that back with an 11 @-@ yard run . On the game 's final play , Taylor completed a 17 @-@ yard first @-@ down pass to Wilson , who was tackled as the last second ticked off the clock and Stanford clinched a 40 – 12 victory . 
 = = = Scoring summary = = = 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 For his game @-@ winning performance , Stanford quarterback Andrew Luck was named the game 's Most Valuable Player . He completed 18 of his 23 pass attempts for 287 yards and 4 touchdowns . The four touchdowns was a Stanford bowl @-@ game record , and three of Luck 's touchdowns went to tight end Coby Fleener , who set a Stanford and Orange Bowl record with 173 receiving yards and tied a record with the three touchdown catches . In postgame analysis , Fleener 's performance was touted as the factor " that turned a close game into a rout " . 
 Despite those players ' performances , the game was decided in the running game and the performance of the two teams ' offensive and defensive lines . Stanford coach Jim Harbaugh was praised for adjusting his team 's strategy at halftime , allowing it to succeed in the second half . Stanford 's rushing offense accounted for 247 yards , while its defensive line limited Virginia Tech to just 67 yards rushing . The Stanford defense also sacked Virginia Tech quarterback Tyrod Taylor eight times , denying him time to pass the ball accurately . 
 Stanford 's leading rusher was Stepfan Taylor , who accumulated 114 yards on 13 carries , including a 56 @-@ yard sprint that was the second @-@ longest run of his career . Stanford 's No. 2 runner , Jeremy Stewart , had a career @-@ high 99 rushing yards . His 60 @-@ yard touchdown run in the first quarter is the longest touchdown run in Stanford bowl @-@ game history and the seventh @-@ longest in Orange Bowl history . Virginia Tech 's leading rusher was Darren Evans , who had 12 carries for 37 yards . Virginia Tech quarterback Tyrod Taylor was the team 's No. 2 rusher , with 16 carries for 22 yards . He also completed 16 of 31 pass attempts for 222 yards and Tech 's sole touchdown . 
 On defense , Virginia Tech 's Jayron Hosley tied the school record for interceptions ( 9 ) and had the most in the nation that season when he caught an Andrew Luck pass in the first half . Tech 's defense also recorded its first safety since 2008 , and its blocked extra point was the first such block in Virginia Tech bowl @-@ game history . The Hokies ' leading tackler was Eddie Whitley , who had seven stops , while Stanford 's leading defensive performer was Shayne Skov , who had 12 tackles , including 3 quarterback sacks . 
 = = Postgame effects = = 
 With the victory , Stanford improved to 12 – 1 , while the loss sent Virginia Tech to 11 – 3 . Stanford 's 12 wins extended a school record for one season , and its eight @-@ game winning streak tied for the third @-@ longest in school history . Stanford 's win was its first bowl game victory since the 1996 Sun Bowl against Michigan State , and San Francisco Chronicle football writer Tom FitzGerald declared one of the 10 all @-@ time best Bay Area college football teams . In the final college football polls of the season , Stanford rose to No. 4 , while Virginia Tech dropped to 16th in the Associated Press Poll and 15th in the USA Today coaches ' poll . 
 Stanford 's victory in the Orange Bowl caused a massive jump in the number of season ticket sales at the school . By mid @-@ February 2011 , the school reported having sold 1 @,@ 400 new season tickets , as compared to just 458 in the first six months of 2010 . 
 Following the game , some actions by Orange Bowl Committee officials came under fire as the Miami Herald revealed the nonprofit committee had spent millions of dollars on junket trips for college football administrators . The U.S. federal Internal Revenue Service subsequently began investigating the allegations . In its annual transition to new leadership , the Orange Bowl committee picked Goldman Sachs vice president Jeffrey T. Roberts to serve as its president for the 2012 game . 
 = = = Coaching changes = = = 
 Both teams underwent changes in leadership following the Orange Bowl . Four days after beating Virginia Tech , Stanford head coach Jim Harbaugh signed a contract as the new head coach of the National Football League 's San Francisco 49ers . He was replaced as Stanford head coach by David Shaw , the team 's offensive coordinator . Defensive coordinator Vic Fangio followed Harbaugh to the 49ers and was replaced by co @-@ defensive coordinators Jason Tarver and Derek Mason , the latter also serving as associate head coach . To replace the vacated offensive coordinator position , Shaw selected Stanford wide receivers coach Pep Hamilton . 
 Virginia Tech 's coaching changes came about a month after the Orange Bowl . On February 14 , the school announced that the son of head coach Frank Beamer , Shane Beamer , had been hired as running backs coach . He replaced Billy Hite , the longest @-@ tenured assistant coach in the country , who took an administrative role with the team . Two days later , Tech replaced 62 @-@ year @-@ old linebackers coach Jim Cavanaugh with 35 @-@ year @-@ old Cornell Brown . On February 22 , Tech announced that offensive coordinator Bryan Stinespring had been removed from play @-@ calling duties and replaced by quarterbacks coach Mike O 'Cain . Stinespring , who also was the team 's associate head coach , was replaced in that capacity by Shane Beamer . 
 = = = 2011 NFL Draft = = = 
 For several players on each team , the Orange Bowl was their final collegiate contest before attempting to move into professional football . Two days after the Orange Bowl , Virginia Tech running back Darren Evans announced his intention to enter the NFL Draft . Three days later , fellow running back Ryan Williams made a similar move . Stanford quarterback Andrew Luck made news for not entering the draft , where he had been widely predicted to be the No. 1 selection . In interviews , he said he looked forward " to earning [ his ] degree in architectural design from Stanford University " and graduating in spring 2012 . 
 The 2011 NFL Draft took place in late April , and several players from each Orange Bowl team were selected by professional squads seeking their talents . Virginia Tech 's Ryan Williams was the first Orange Bowl participant selected , taken with the 38th overall pick . Tech 's Rashad Carmichael ( 127th ) , and Tyrod Taylor ( 180th ) were also selected . Stanford had four players picked in the draft : Sione <unk> ( 97th ) , Owen Marecic ( 124th ) , Richard Sherman ( 154th ) , and Ryan Whalen ( 157th ) . 
 = HMS Royal Oak ( 08 ) = 
 HMS Royal Oak was one of five Revenge @-@ class battleships built for the Royal Navy during the First World War . Launched in 1914 and completed in 1916 , Royal Oak first saw combat at the Battle of Jutland as part of the Grand Fleet . In peacetime , she served in the Atlantic , Home and Mediterranean fleets , more than once coming under accidental attack . The ship drew worldwide attention in 1928 when her senior officers were controversially court @-@ martialled . Attempts to modernise Royal Oak throughout her 25 @-@ year career could not fix her fundamental lack of speed and by the start of the Second World War , she was no longer suited to front @-@ line duty . 
 On 14 October 1939 , Royal Oak was anchored at Scapa Flow in Orkney , Scotland , when she was torpedoed by the German submarine U @-@ 47 . Of Royal Oak 's complement of 1 @,@ 234 men and boys , 833 were killed that night or died later of their wounds . The loss of the outdated ship — the first of the five Royal Navy battleships and battlecruisers sunk in the Second World War — did little to affect the numerical superiority enjoyed by the British navy and its Allies , but the sinking had considerable effect on wartime morale . The raid made an immediate celebrity and war hero out of the U @-@ boat commander , Günther Prien , who became the first German submarine officer to be awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross . Before the sinking of Royal Oak , the Royal Navy had considered the naval base at Scapa Flow impregnable to submarine attack , and U @-@ 47 's raid demonstrated that the German Navy was capable of bringing the war to British home waters . The shock resulted in rapid changes to dockland security and the construction of the Churchill Barriers around Scapa Flow . 
 The wreck of Royal Oak , a designated war grave , lies almost upside down in 100 feet ( 30 m ) of water with her hull 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) beneath the surface . In an annual ceremony to mark the loss of the ship , Royal Navy divers place a White Ensign underwater at her stern . Unauthorised divers are prohibited from approaching the wreck at any time under the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Revenge @-@ class ships were designed as slightly smaller , slower , and more heavily protected versions of the preceding Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships . As an economy measure they were intended to revert to the previous practice of using both fuel oil and coal , but First Sea Lord Jackie Fisher rescinded the decision for coal in October 1914 . Still under construction , the ships were redesigned to employ oil @-@ fired boilers that increased the power of the engines by 9 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 6 @,@ 700 kW ) over the original specification . 
 Royal Oak had a length overall of 620 feet 7 inches ( 189 @.@ 2 m ) , a beam of 88 feet 6 inches ( 27 @.@ 0 m ) and a deep draught of 33 feet 7 inches ( 10 @.@ 2 m ) . She had a designed displacement of 27 @,@ 790 long tons ( 28 @,@ 240 t ) and displaced 31 @,@ 130 long tons ( 31 @,@ 630 t ) at deep load . She was powered by two sets of Parsons steam turbines , each driving two shafts , using steam from 18 Yarrow boilers . The turbines were rated at 40 @,@ 000 shp ( 30 @,@ 000 kW ) and intended to reach a maximum speed of 23 knots ( 42 @.@ 6 km / h ; 26 @.@ 5 mph ) . During her sea trials on 22 May 1916 , the ship only reached a top speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) from 40 @,@ 360 shp ( 30 @,@ 100 kW ) . She had a range of 7 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 964 km ; 8 @,@ 055 mi ) at a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 18 @.@ 5 km / h ; 11 @.@ 5 mph ) . Her crew numbered 909 officers and enlisted men in 1916 . 
 The Revenge class was equipped with eight breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) Mk I guns in four twin gun turrets , in two superfiring pairs fore and aft of the superstructure , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear . Twelve of the fourteen BL 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Mk XII guns were mounted in casemates along the broadside of the vessel amidships ; the remaining pair were mounted on the shelter deck and were protected by gun shields . Their anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) armament consisted of two quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) 20 cwt Mk I guns . The ships were fitted with four submerged 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes , two on each broadside . 
 Royal Oak was completed with two fire @-@ control directors fitted with 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) rangefinders . One was mounted above the conning tower , protected by an armoured hood , and the other was in the spotting top above the tripod foremast . Each turret was also fitted with a 15 @-@ foot rangefinder . The main armament could be controlled by ' X ' turret as well . The secondary armament was primarily controlled by directors mounted on each side of the compass platform on the foremast once they were fitted in March 1917 . A torpedo @-@ control director with a 15 @-@ foot rangefinder was mounted at the aft end of the superstructure . 
 The ship 's waterline belt consisted of Krupp cemented armour ( KC ) that was 13 inches ( 330 mm ) thick between ' A ' and ' Y ' barbettes and thinned to 4 to 6 inches ( 102 to 152 mm ) towards the ship 's ends , but did not reach either the bow or the stern . Above this was a strake of armour 6 inches thick that extended between ' A ' and ' X ' barbettes . Transverse bulkheads 4 to 6 inches thick ran at an angle from the ends of the thickest part of the waterline belt to ' A ' and ' Y ' barbettes . The gun turrets were protected by 11 to 13 inches ( 279 to 330 mm ) of KC armour , except for the turret roofs which were 4 @.@ 75 – 5 inches ( 121 – 127 mm ) thick . The barbettes ranged in thickness from 6 – 10 inches ( 152 – 254 mm ) above the upper deck , but were only 4 to 6 inches thick below it . The Revenge @-@ class ships had multiple armoured decks that ranged from 1 to 4 inches ( 25 to 102 mm ) in thickness . The main conning tower had 13 inches of armour on the sides with a 3 @-@ inch roof . The torpedo director in the rear superstructure had 6 inches of armour protecting it . After the Battle of Jutland , 1 inch of high @-@ tensile steel was added to the main deck over the magazines and additional anti @-@ flash equipment was added in the magazines . 
 The ship was fitted with flying @-@ off platforms mounted on the roofs of ' B ' and ' X ' turrets in 1918 , from which fighters and reconnaissance aircraft could launch . In 1934 the platforms were removed from the turrets and a catapult was installed on the roof of ' X ' turret , along with a crane to recover a seaplane . 
 = = = Major alterations = = = 
 Royal Oak was extensively refitted between 1922 and 1924 , when her anti @-@ aircraft defences were upgraded by replacing the original three @-@ inch AA guns with a pair of QF four @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) Mk V AA guns . A 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) rangefinder was fitted in ' B ' turret and a simple high @-@ angle rangefinder was added above the bridge . Underwater protection improved by the addition of anti @-@ torpedo bulges . They were designed to reduce the effect of torpedo detonations and improve stability at the cost of widening the ship 's beam by over 13 feet ( 4 m ) . They increased her beam to 102 feet 1 inch ( 31 @.@ 1 m ) , reduced her draught to 29 feet 6 inches ( 9 @.@ 0 m ) , increased her metacentric height to 6 @.@ 3 feet ( 1 @.@ 9 m ) at deep load , and all of the changes to her equipment increased her crew to a total of 1 @,@ 188 . Despite the bulges she was able to reach a speed of 21 @.@ 75 knots ( 40 @.@ 28 km / h ; 25 @.@ 03 mph ) . A brief refit in early 1927 saw the addition of two more four @-@ inch AA guns and the removal of the six @-@ inch guns from the shelter deck . About 1931 , a High @-@ Angle Control System ( HACS ) Mk I director replaced the high @-@ angle rangefinder on the spotting top . Two years later , the aft pair of torpedo tubes were removed . 
 The ship received a final refit between 1934 and 1936 , when her deck armour was increased to 5 inches ( 12 @.@ 7 cm ) over the magazines and to 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 8 @.@ 9 cm ) over the engine rooms . In addition to a general modernisation of the ship 's systems , her anti @-@ aircraft defences were strengthened by replacing the single mounts of the AA guns with twin mounts for the QF 4 @-@ inch Mark XVI gun and adding a pair of octuple mounts for two @-@ pounder Mk VIII " pom @-@ pom " guns to sponsons abreast the funnel . Two positions for " pom @-@ pom " anti @-@ aircraft directors were added on new platforms abreast and below the fire @-@ control director in the spotting top . A HACS Mk III director replaced the Mk I in the spotting top and another replaced the torpedo director aft . A pair of quadruple mounts for Vickers .50 machine guns were added abreast the conning tower . The mainmast was reconstructed as a tripod to support the weight of a radio @-@ direction finding office and a second High @-@ Angle Control Station . The forward pair of submerged torpedo tubes were removed and four experimental 21 @-@ inch torpedo tubes were added above water forward of ' A ' turret . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Royal Oak was laid down at Devonport Royal Dockyard on 15 January 1914 . She was launched on 17 November , and after fitting @-@ out , was commissioned on 1 May 1916 at a final cost of £ 2 @,@ 468 @,@ 269 . Named after the oak tree in which Charles II hid following his defeat at the 1651 Battle of Worcester , she was the eighth vessel to bear the name Royal Oak , replacing a pre @-@ dreadnought scrapped in 1914 . 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 Upon completion Royal Oak was assigned to the Third Division of the Fourth Battle Squadron of the Grand Fleet and engaged the German High Seas Fleet in the Battle of Jutland . Under the command of Captain Crawford Maclachlan , Royal Oak left Scapa Flow on the evening of 30 May in the company of the battleships Superb , Canada and Admiral Jellicoe 's flagship Iron Duke . The next day 's indecisive battle saw Royal Oak fire a total of thirty @-@ eight 15 @-@ inch and eighty @-@ four 6 @-@ inch shells , claiming three hits on the battlecruiser SMS Derfflinger , putting one of its turrets out of action , and a hit on the cruiser SMS Wiesbaden . She avoided damage herself , despite being straddled by shellfire on one occasion . 
 Following the battle , Royal Oak was reassigned to the First Battle Squadron . On 5 November 1918 — the final week of the First World War — she was anchored off Burntisland in the Firth of Forth accompanied by the seaplane tender Campania and the light battlecruiser Glorious . A sudden Force 10 squall caused Campania to drag her anchor , collide with Royal Oak and then with Glorious . Both capital ships suffered only minor damage ; Campania , however , was holed by her initial collision with Royal Oak . The ship 's engine rooms flooded , and she settled by the stern and sank five hours later , though without loss of life . 
 At the end of the First World War , Royal Oak escorted several vessels of the surrendering German High Seas Fleet from the Firth of Forth to their internment in Scapa Flow , and was present at a ceremony in Pentland Firth to greet other ships as they followed . 
 = = = Between the wars = = = 
 The peacetime reorganisation of the Royal Navy assigned Royal Oak to the Second Battle Squadron of the Atlantic Fleet . Modernised by the 1922 – 24 refit , she was transferred in 1926 to the Mediterranean Fleet , based in Grand Harbour , Malta . In early 1928 , this duty saw the notorious incident the contemporary press dubbed the " Royal Oak Mutiny " . What began as a simple dispute between Rear @-@ Admiral Bernard Collard and Royal Oak 's two senior officers , Captain Kenneth Dewar and Commander Henry Daniel , over the band at the ship 's wardroom dance , descended into a bitter personal feud that spanned several months . Dewar and Daniel accused Collard of " vindictive fault @-@ finding " and openly humiliating and insulting them before their crew ; in return , Collard countercharged the two with failing to follow orders and treating him " worse than a midshipman " . When Dewar and Daniel wrote letters of complaint to Collard 's superior , Vice @-@ Admiral John Kelly , he immediately passed them on to the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Admiral Sir Roger Keyes . On realising that the relationship between the two and their flag admiral had irretrievably broken down , Keyes removed all three from their posts and sent them back to England , postponing a major naval exercise . The press picked up on the story worldwide , describing the affair — with some hyperbole — as a " mutiny " . Public attention reached such proportions as to raise the concerns of the King , who summoned First Lord of the Admiralty William Bridgeman for an explanation . 
 For their letters of complaint , Dewar and Daniel were controversially charged with writing subversive documents . In a pair of highly publicised courts @-@ martial , both were found guilty and severely reprimanded , leading Daniel to resign from the Navy . Collard himself was criticised for the excesses of his conduct by the press and in Parliament , and on being denounced by Bridgeman as " unfitted to hold further high command " , was forcibly retired from service . Of the three , only Dewar escaped with his career , albeit a damaged one : he remained in the Royal Navy , but in a series of more minor commands . His promotion to Rear @-@ Admiral , which would normally have been a formality , was delayed until the following year , just one day before his retirement . Daniel attempted a career in journalism , but when this and other ventures were unsuccessful , he disappeared into obscurity amid poor health in South Africa . Collard retreated to private life and never spoke publicly of the incident again . 
 The scandal proved an embarrassment to the reputation of the Royal Navy , then still the world 's largest , and it was satirised at home and abroad through editorials , cartoons , and even a comic jazz oratorio composed by Erwin <unk> . One consequence of the damaging affair was an undertaking from the Admiralty to review the means by which naval officers might bring complaints against the conduct of their superiors . 
 = = = Spanish Civil War = = = 
 During the Spanish Civil War , Royal Oak was tasked with conducting ' non @-@ intervention patrols ' around the Iberian Peninsula . On such a patrol and steaming some 30 nautical miles ( 56 km ; 35 mi ) east of Gibraltar on 2 February 1937 , she came under aerial attack by three aircraft of the Republican forces . They dropped three bombs ( two of which exploded ) within 3 cables ( 555 m ) of the starboard bow , though causing no damage . The British chargé d 'affaires protested the incident to the Republican Government , which admitted its error and apologised for the attack . Later that same month , while stationed off Valencia on 23 February 1937 during an aerial bombardment by the Nationalists , she was accidentally struck by an anti @-@ aircraft shell fired from a Republican position . Five men were injured , including Royal Oak 's captain , T. B. Drew . On this occasion however the British elected not to protest to the Republicans , deeming the incident " an act of God " . In May 1937 , she and HMS Forester escorted SS Habana , a liner carrying Basque child refugees , to England . In July , as the war in northern Spain flared up , Royal Oak , along with the battleship HMS Resolution rescued the steamer <unk> when Spanish nationalist warships attempted to capture her off Santander . She was however unable on 14 July to prevent the seizure of the British freighter Molton by the Spanish nationalist cruiser Almirante Cervera while trying to enter Santander . The merchantmen had been engaged in the evacuation of refugees . 
 This same period saw Royal Oak star alongside fourteen other Royal Navy vessels in the 1937 British film melodrama Our Fighting Navy , the plot of which centres around a coup in the fictional South American republic of Bianco . Royal Oak portrays a rebel battleship El <unk> , whose commander forces a British captain ( played by Robert Douglas ) into choosing between his lover and his duty . The film was poorly received by critics , but gained some redemption through its dramatic scenes of naval action . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 In 1938 , Royal Oak returned to the Home Fleet and was made flagship of the Second Battle Squadron based in Portsmouth . On 24 November 1938 , she returned the body of the British @-@ born Queen Maud of Norway , who had died in London , to a state funeral in Oslo , accompanied by her husband King Haakon VII . Paying off in December 1938 , Royal Oak was recommissioned the following June , and in the late summer of 1939 embarked on a short training cruise in the English Channel in preparation for another 30 @-@ month tour of the Mediterranean , for which her crew were pre @-@ issued tropical uniforms . As hostilities loomed , the battleship was instead dispatched north to Scapa Flow , and was at anchor there when war was declared on 3 September . 
 The next few weeks proved uneventful , but in October 1939 Royal Oak joined the search for the German battleship Gneisenau , which had been ordered into the North Sea as a diversion for the commerce @-@ raiding heavy cruisers Deutschland and Admiral Graf Spee . The search was ultimately fruitless , particularly for Royal Oak , whose top speed , by then less than 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) , was inadequate to keep up with the rest of the fleet . On 12 October , Royal Oak returned to the defences of Scapa Flow in poor shape , battered by North Atlantic storms . Many of her Carley floats had been smashed and several of the smaller @-@ calibre guns rendered inoperable through flooding . The mission had underlined the obsolescence of the 25 @-@ year @-@ old warship . Concerned that a recent overflight by German reconnaissance aircraft heralded an imminent air attack upon Scapa Flow , Admiral of the Home Fleet Charles Forbes ordered most of the fleet to disperse to safer ports . Royal Oak remained behind , her anti @-@ aircraft guns still deemed a useful addition to Scapa 's otherwise scanty air defences . 
 = = Sinking = = 
 = = = Scapa Flow = = = 
 Scapa Flow made a near @-@ ideal anchorage . Situated at the centre of the Orkney Islands off the north coast of Scotland , the natural harbour , large enough to contain the entire Grand Fleet , was surrounded by a ring of islands separated by shallow channels subject to fast @-@ racing tides . The threat from U @-@ boats had however long been realised , and a series of countermeasures were installed during the early years of the First World War . Blockships were sunk at critical points , and floating booms deployed to block the three widest channels , and operated by tugboats to allow the passage of friendly shipping . It was considered possible — but highly unlikely — that a daring U @-@ boat commander could attempt to race through undetected before the boom was closed . Two submarines that had attempted infiltration during the First World War were ill @-@ fated : on 23 November 1914 U @-@ 18 was rammed twice before running aground with the capture of her crew , and UB @-@ 116 was detected by hydrophone and destroyed with the loss of all hands on 28 October 1918 . 
 Scapa Flow provided the main anchorage for the British Grand Fleet throughout most of the First World War , but in the interwar period this passed to Rosyth , more conveniently located further south in the Firth of Forth . Scapa Flow was reactivated with the advent of the Second World War , becoming a base for the British Home Fleet . Its natural and artificial defences , while still strong , were recognised as in need of improvement , and in the early weeks of the war were in the process of being strengthened by the provision of additional blockships . 
 = = = Special Operation P : the raid by U @-@ 47 = = = 
 Kriegsmarine Commander of Submarines ( Befehlshaber der U @-@ Boote ) Karl Dönitz devised a plan to attack Scapa Flow by submarine within days of the outbreak of war . Its goal would be twofold : firstly , that displacing the Home Fleet from Scapa Flow would slacken the British North Sea blockade and grant Germany greater freedom to attack the Atlantic convoys ; secondly , the blow would be a symbolic act of vengeance , striking at the same location where the German High Seas Fleet had surrendered and scuttled itself following Germany 's defeat in the First World War . Dönitz hand @-@ picked Kapitänleutnant Günther Prien for the task , scheduling the raid for the night of 13 / 14 October 1939 , when the tides would be high and the night moonless . 
 Dönitz was aided by high @-@ quality photographs from a reconnaissance overflight by Siegfried <unk> , ( who received his first Iron Cross for the mission ) , and which revealed the weaknesses of the defences and an abundance of targets . He directed Prien to enter Scapa Flow from its east via Kirk Sound , passing to the north of Lamb Holm , a small low @-@ lying island between Burray and Mainland . Prien initially mistook the more southerly Skerry Sound for the chosen route and his sudden realisation that U @-@ 47 was heading for the shallow blocked passage forced him to order a rapid turn to the northeast . On the surface , and illuminated by a bright display of the aurora borealis , the submarine threaded between the sunken blockships <unk> and Numidian , grounding itself temporarily on a cable strung from <unk> . It was briefly caught in the headlights of a taxi onshore , but the driver raised no alarm . On entering the harbour proper at 00 : 27 on 14 October , Prien entered a triumphant Wir sind in Scapa Flow ! ! ! in the log and set a south @-@ westerly course for several kilometres before reversing direction . To his surprise , the anchorage appeared to be almost empty ; unknown to him , Forbes ' order to disperse the fleet had removed some of the biggest targets . U @-@ 47 had been heading directly towards four warships , including the newly commissioned light cruiser Belfast , anchored off Flotta and Hoy 4 nautical miles ( 8 km , 5 mi ) distant , but Prien gave no indication that he had seen them . 
 On the reverse course , a lookout on the bridge spotted Royal Oak lying approximately 4 @,@ 400 yards ( 4 @,@ 000 m ) to the north , correctly identifying it as a battleship of the Revenge class . Mostly hidden behind her was a second ship , only the bow of which was visible to U @-@ 47 . Prien mistook it to be a battlecruiser of the Renown class , German intelligence later labelling it Repulse . It was in fact the World War I seaplane tender Pegasus . 
 At 00 : 58 U @-@ 47 fired a salvo of three torpedoes from its bow tubes , a fourth lodging in its tube . Two failed to find a target , but a single torpedo struck the bow of Royal Oak at 01 : 04 , shaking the ship and waking the crew . Little visible damage was received , though the starboard anchor chain was severed , clattering noisily down through its slips . Initially , it was suspected that there had been an explosion in the ship 's forward inflammable store , used to store materials such as kerosene . Mindful of the unexplained explosion that had destroyed HMS Vanguard in Scapa Flow in 1917 , an announcement was made over Royal Oak 's tannoy system to check the magazine temperatures , but many sailors returned to their hammocks , unaware that the ship was under attack . 
 Prien turned his submarine and attempted another shot via his stern tube , but this too missed . Reloading his bow tubes , he doubled back and fired a salvo of three torpedoes , all at Royal Oak , This time he was successful : at 01 : 16 all three struck the battleship in quick succession amidships and detonated . The explosions blew a hole in the armoured deck , destroying the Stokers ' , Boys ' and Marines ' messes and causing a loss of electrical power . Cordite from a magazine ignited and the ensuing fireball passed rapidly through the ship 's internal spaces . Royal Oak quickly listed some 15 ° , sufficient to push the open starboard @-@ side portholes below the waterline . She soon rolled further onto her side to 45 ° , hanging there for several minutes before disappearing beneath the surface at 01 : 29 , 13 minutes after Prien 's second strike . 833 men died with the ship , including Rear @-@ Admiral Henry <unk> , commander of the Second Battle Squadron . Over one hundred of the dead were Boy Seamen , not yet 18 years old , the largest ever such loss in a single Royal Navy action . The admiral 's wooden gig , moored alongside , was dragged down with Royal Oak . 
 = = = Rescue efforts = = = 
 The tender Daisy 2 , skippered by John Gatt , had been tied up for the night to Royal Oak 's port side . As the sinking battleship began to list to starboard , Gatt ordered Daisy 2 to be cut loose , his vessel becoming briefly caught on Royal Oak 's rising anti @-@ torpedo bulge and lifted from the sea before freeing herself . 
 Many of Royal Oak 's crew who had managed to jump from the sinking ship were dressed in little more than their nightclothes and were unprepared for the chilling water . A thick layer of fuel oil coated the surface , filling men 's lungs and stomachs and hampering their efforts to swim . Of those who attempted the half @-@ mile ( 800 m ) swim to the nearest shore , only a handful survived . Gatt switched the lights of Daisy 2 on and he and his crew managed to pull 386 men from the water , including Royal Oak 's commander , Captain William Benn . The rescue efforts continued for another two and a half hours until nearly 4 : 00 am , when Gatt abandoned the search for more survivors and took those he had to Pegasus . Although aided by boats from Pegasus and the harbour , he was responsible for rescuing almost all the survivors , an act for which he was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross , the only military award made by the British in connection with the disaster . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The British were initially confused as to the cause of the sinking , suspecting either an on @-@ board explosion or aerial attack . Once it was realised that a submarine attack was the most likely explanation , steps were rapidly made to seal the anchorage , but U @-@ 47 had already escaped and was on its way back to Germany . The BBC released news of the sinking by late morning on 14 October , and its broadcasts were received by the German listening services and by U @-@ 47 itself . Divers sent down on the morning after the explosion discovered remnants of a German torpedo , confirming the means of attack . On 17 October First Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill officially announced the loss of Royal Oak to the House of Commons , first conceding that the raid had been " a remarkable exploit of professional skill and daring " , but then declaring that the loss would not materially affect the naval balance of power . An Admiralty Board of Enquiry convened between 18 and 24 October to establish the circumstances under which the anchorage had been penetrated . In the meantime , the Home Fleet was ordered to remain at safer ports until security issues at Scapa could be addressed . Churchill was obliged to respond to questions in the House as to why Royal Oak had had aboard so many Boys , most of whom lost their lives . He defended the Royal Navy tradition of sending boys aged 15 to 17 to sea , but the practice was generally discontinued shortly after the disaster , and under 18 @-@ year @-@ olds served on active warships in only the most exceptional circumstances . 
 The Nazi Propaganda Ministry was quick to capitalise on the successful raid , and radio broadcasts by the popular journalist Hans <unk> displayed the triumph felt throughout Germany . Prien and his crew reached Wilhelmshaven at 11 : 44 on 17 October and were immediately greeted as heroes , learning that Prien had been awarded the Iron Cross First Class , and each man of the crew the Iron Cross Second Class . Hitler sent his personal plane to bring the crew to Berlin , where he further invested Prien with the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross . This decoration , made for the first time to a German submarine officer , later became the customary decoration for successful U @-@ Boat commanders . Dönitz was rewarded by promotion from Commodore to Rear @-@ Admiral and was made Flag Officer of U @-@ Boats . 
 Prien was nicknamed " The Bull of Scapa Flow " and his crew decorated U @-@ 47 's conning tower with a snorting bull mascot , later adopted as the emblem of the 7th U @-@ boat Flotilla . He found himself in demand for radio and newspaper interviews , and his ' autobiography ' was published the following year , titled Mein Weg nach Scapa Flow . Ghost @-@ written for him by a German journalist , in the post @-@ war years certain of its claims , and in particular those relating to the events of October 1939 , were brought into question . 
 The British Admiralty 's official report into the disaster condemned the defences at Scapa Flow , and censured Sir Wilfred French , Admiral Commanding Orkney and Shetland , for their unprepared state . French was placed on the retired list , despite having warned the previous summer of Scapa Flow 's deficient anti @-@ submarine defences , and volunteering to bring a small ship or submarine himself past the blockships to prove his point . On Churchill 's orders , the eastern approaches to Scapa Flow were sealed with concrete causeways linking Lamb Holm , <unk> Holm , Burray and South Ronaldsay to Mainland . Constructed largely by Italian prisoners of war , the Churchill Barriers , as they became known , were essentially complete by September 1944 , though they were not opened officially until just after VE Day in May 1945 . They now form part of the transport infrastructure of Orkney , carrying the <unk> road between the islands . 
 In the years that followed , a rumour circulated that Prien had been guided into Scapa by one Alfred <unk> , a German agent living in Orkney in the guise of a Swiss watchmaker named Albert Oertel . Following the attack , ' Oertel ' escaped with the submarine B @-@ 06 back to Germany . This account of events originated as an article by the journalist Curt Riess in the 16 May 1942 issue of the American magazine Saturday Evening Post and was later embellished by other authors , who added details of their own . Post @-@ war searches through German and Orcadian archives have , however , failed to find any evidence for the existence of Oertel , <unk> or a submarine named B @-@ 06 , and the story is now held to be wholly fictitious . The Orkneys ' chief librarian , in a 1983 letter on the matter to the historian Nigel West , offered his suggestion that the name Albert Oertel was likely a pun on the well @-@ known Albert Hotel in Kirkwall . 
 = = = Survivors = = = 
 In the immediate aftermath of the sinking , Royal Oak 's survivors were billeted in the towns and villages of Orkney . A funeral parade for the dead took place at Lyness on Hoy on 16 October ; many of the surviving crew , having lost all their own clothing on the ship , attended in borrowed boiler suits and gym shoes . They were generally granted a few days survivors ' leave by the navy , and then assigned to ships and roles elsewhere . Kenneth Toop , who survived the sinking while serving as a Boy , First Class on Royal Oak , served as the Royal Oak Association 's Honorary Secretary . An annual ceremony of remembrance is held by the survivors and descendants of the crew at the Naval War Memorial , Southsea , on the anniversary of the sinking . As of March 2016 , Arthur Smith was the last remaining survivor from the ship 's company . 
 Prien did not survive the war : he and U @-@ 47 were lost under unclear circumstances on 7 March 1941 , possibly as a result of an attack by the British destroyer HMS Wolverine . News of the loss was kept secret by the Nazi government for ten weeks . Several U @-@ 47 crew from the Royal Oak mission did survive , having been transferred to other vessels . Some of them subsequently met with their former enemies from Royal Oak and forged friendships with them . 
 = = Wreck = = 
 = = = Status as war grave = = = 
 Despite the relatively shallow water in which she sank , the majority of bodies could not be recovered from Royal Oak . Marked by a buoy at 58 ° 55 ′ 51 ″ N 2 ° 59 ′ 00 ″ W , the wreck has been designated a war grave and all diving or other unauthorised forms of exploration are prohibited under the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986 . In clear water conditions , the upturned hull can be seen reaching to within 5 m of the surface . The brass letters that formed Royal Oak 's name were removed as a keepsake by a recreational diver in the 1970s . They were returned almost twenty years later , and are now displayed in the Scapa Flow visitor centre in Lyness . Royal Oak 's loss is commemorated in an annual ceremony in which Royal Navy divers place the White Ensign underwater at her stern . A memorial at St Magnus ' Cathedral in nearby Kirkwall displays a plaque dedicated to those who lost their lives , beneath which a book of remembrance lists their names . This list of names was not released by the Government until 40 years after the sinking . Each week a page of the book is turned . The ship 's bell was recovered in the 1970s and , after being restored , was added to the memorial in St Magnus ' . A number of bodies , including some that could not be identified , were interred at the naval cemetery in Lyness . 
 = = = Environmental concerns = = = 
 Royal Oak sank with up to 3 @,@ 000 tons of fuel oil aboard , the precise amount being unknown since such records were lost with the ship . Oil leaked from the corroding hull at an increased rate during the 1990s and concerns about the environmental impact led the Ministry of Defence to consider plans for extracting it . Royal Oak 's status as a war grave required that surveys and any proposed techniques for removing the oil be handled sensitively : plans in the 1950s to raise and salvage the wreck had been dropped in response to public opposition . In addition to the ethical concerns , poorly managed efforts could destabilise the wreck , resulting in a mass release of the remaining oil ; the ship also contains many tons of unexploded ordnance . 
 The MOD commissioned a series of multi @-@ beam sonar surveys to image the wreck and appraise its condition . The high @-@ resolution sonograms showed Royal Oak to be lying almost upside down with her top works forced into the seabed . The tip of the bow had been blown off by U @-@ 47 's first torpedo and a gaping hole on the starboard flank was the result of the triple strike from her second successful salvo . Following several years of delays , Briggs Marine was contracted by the MoD to conduct the task of pumping off the remaining oil . Royal Oak 's mid @-@ construction conversion to fuel oil had placed her fuel tanks in unconventional positions , complicating operations . By 2006 , all double bottom tanks had been cleared and the task of removing oil from the inner wing tanks with cold cutting equipment began the next year . By 2010 , some 1600 tonnes of fuel oil had been removed , and the wreck was declared to be no longer actively releasing oil into Scapa Flow . Operations continue at a reduced pace to tackle the oil known to be remaining . 
 = Norodom Chakrapong = 
 Norodom Chakrapong ( born 21 October 1945 ) is a Cambodian prince , politician , military commander and businessman . He is the fourth son of Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia and also a half @-@ brother of the current king , Norodom Sihamoni . Chakrapong started his career as a military pilot in 1963 . After Sihanouk was overthrown in 1970 , Chakrapong spent time under house arrest and living overseas before he joined the Funcinpec Party in 1981 . In 1991 , Chakrapong left Funcinpec to join the Cambodian People 's Party ( CPP ) and served as the Deputy Prime Minister of Cambodia between 1992 and 1993 . When the CPP lost the 1993 general elections , Chakrapong led a secession attempt in 1993 and another coup attempt in 1994 which led him to be sent into exile . After Chakrapong was pardoned in 1998 , he founded a private airline company , Royal Phnom Penh Airways . The airlines later went bankrupt in early 2006 . 
 In 2002 , Chakrapong established a royalist party , the Khmer Soul Party . When the Khmer Soul Party failed to win a single parliamentary seat in the 2003 general elections , <unk> rejoined Funcinpec and briefly served as the First Vice President of the Senate in 2005 . In 2006 , Chakrapong was expelled from Funcinpec and joined the Norodom Ranariddh Party . When the Cambodian government pursued legal investigations on the debts Chakrapong accumulated from his airlines , Chakrapong quit politics in 2007 . Chakrapong was subsequently appointed as a privy councillor to the Supreme Privy Council and dedicated himself to humanitarian work and supporting royal activities . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Norodom Chakrapong was born at the <unk> Palace in Phnom Penh , Cambodia to Sihanouk and Sisowath Pongsanmoni . As a young boy , Chakrapong was trained as a ballet dancer at the Royal Ballet of Cambodia , and performed at several state functions when Sihanouk attended or hosted foreign dignitaries when he was Prime Minister . In 1958 , Chakrapong was sent with his half @-@ brother Ranariddh to Marseille , France , where they attended high school . After graduating in 1963 , Chakrapong returned to Cambodia and became an officer cadet with the Royal Cambodian Air Force where graduated at the top of his class . After completing his cadet course , Chakrapong was sent back to France for a year where he received extensive training in flying MiG @-@ 21 jets . He returned in 1967 and was later commissioned as a lieutenant . When Lon Nol launched a coup against Sihanouk in March 1970 , Chakrapong was arrested and kept under house arrest until November 1973 . After his release , Chakrapong went to Beijing , China , where he joined his father and served as his father 's Chief of Protocol between 1973 and 1975 . In 1975 , Chakrapong travelled to Yugoslavia at the invitation of Josip Broz Tito . He spent a year at the Yugoslav Air Force Staff College , before he moved to France with his family as political refugees in 1976 . Chakrapong settled in Marseille and lived close to Ranariddh until 1981 . During this time , Chakrapong ran a small enterprise to provide a source of income for his family . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = First time in Funcinpec = = = 
 Chakrapong joined Sihanouk in helping to form the Funcinpec Party in March 1981 . He was appointed a commander of the Armee Nationale Sihanoukiste ( ANS , informally known as the Funcinpec army ) . The following year , Chakrapong was made a committee member overseeing Health and Social Affairs for the party , a position that he held until 1984 . In March 1985 , Chakrapong became the deputy Chief of Staff of ANS . During this time , Chakrapong defended ANS military bases against Vietnamese incursions . In 1989 , Ranariddh made Chakrapong to represent Funcinpec in negotiations leading to the 1991 Paris Peace Accords . Chakrapong was against the decision to co @-@ opt the Khmer Rouge into playing any role in future Cambodian governments , a stand that came into conflict with Ranariddh and other senior Funcinpec leaders . 
 = = = Cambodia People 's Party , secession and coup attempt = = = 
 In October 1991 , Chakrapong held secret talks with the Khmer Rouge commander , Ta Mok , to explore the possibility of joining the Khmer Rouge . Ta Mok rejected his request , and he approached Hun Sen on the possibility of joining the CPP . The following month , Chakrapong quit Funcinpec to join the CPP at Hun Sen 's invitation . He was given a seat in the party 's politburo , and in January 1992 Chakrapong was appointed Deputy Prime Minister in charge of civil aviation , tourism , industry , culture , education , and social welfare affairs . Shortly after he was appointed to the post , Chakrapong was appointed director of Kampuchea Airlines . He also encouraged foreign investment in Cambodia and provided support to investors that established financial institutions and enterprises in the country . 
 When the 1993 general elections were held , Chakrapong campaigned for a Presidential system of government for Cambodia with Sihanouk as president . After Funcinpec won the elections in May 1993 , he enlisted Sin Song , the minister for national security , to jointly pressure Hun Sen to protest the election results . When Hun Sen did not agree to Chakrapong 's plans , a brief attempt was made to arrest him which ended in failure when the rest of the CPP politburo expressed solidarity to Hun Sen. Subsequently , Hun Sen issued a directive to strip Chakrapong and Sin Song of their status as Members of Parliament . On 10 June , Chakrapong led a few senior CPP allies , including Sin Song and Bou Thang , to declare the secession of seven eastern Cambodian provinces bordering Vietnam from control by the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia ( UNTAC ) . The region was renamed the " Samdech Euv Autonomous Zone " . UNTAC staff personnel were ordered to leave , and Chakrapong issued orders to soldiers under his command to ransack UNTAC and Funcinpec offices in these provinces . Three days later , Ranariddh returned to Cambodia to preside over an emergency parliamentary meeting to reinstate Sihanouk as the country 's Head of State . At the same time , Tea <unk> issued a directive to the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces to restore order in the seven eastern provinces . When Chakrapong received news of these developments , he fled across the border to Vietnam on 15 June . Sihanouk made a formal request for Chakrapong to drop his secessionist movement and return to Phnom Penh . Chakrapong obeyed his father 's request to return and was awarded the military rank of Major @-@ General for the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces . 
 After a permanent government was formed in September 1993 , Chakrapong and Sin Song appealed to the CPP politburo to be reinstated as Members of Parliament . The CPP made several motions for this purpose , but faced strong opposition from Funcinpec members of parliament under Ranariddh 's instructions . In May 1994 , the CPP was able to secure support from Funcinpec to outlaw the Khmer Rouge in exchange for an agreement not to pursue any further motions to reinstate Chakrapong and Sin Song as Members of Parliament . A month later in June , Chakrapong and Sin Song approached Sin Sen – Sin Song 's colleague in the ministry of national security to plot a coup and overthrow the government . On 2 July , Sin Song commanded twelve APCs and three hundred police troops from Prey Veng and marched towards Phnom Penh . General Nhek Bun Chhay sent his troops to intercept and disarm Sin Song 's troops before they reached Phnom Penh . 
 Hun Sen ordered soldiers to arrest Sin Song , Sin Sen , and Chakrapong . When Chakrapong heard that Sin Song was arrested , he became worried for his life and safety , and sought refuge at Regent Hotel in Phnom Penh on 3 July . Chakrapong called American journalist Nate Thayer for help , who assisted him to negotiate with government ministers and diplomats for safe passage out of Cambodia . Thayer had initially to sought asylum in the United States but was unsuccessful in contacting US Ambassador Charles Twining . After several hours of negotiations , the government allowed Chakrapong to leave Cambodia for Malaysia . Chakrapong issued a statement to deny his involvement in the coup attempt , and sent a letter to then @-@ Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim for long @-@ term asylum in Malaysia . Anwar turned down Chakrapong 's request after Ranariddh expressed disapproval , and Chakrapong subsequently sought long @-@ term refuge in France where he was to stay for the next four years . 
 = = = Subsequent political career = = = 
 Chakrapong received a royal pardon from Sihanouk in November 1998 and returned to Cambodia in early 1999 . He subsequently rejoined Funcinpec as an ordinary member in March 1999 at Ranariddh 's invitation . Chakrapong abstained from playing an active role in the party to avoid renewing tensions with his brother , and focused on his business career . In April 2001 , Chakrapong shared the idea of forming a new party with Funcinpec party members . In May 2002 , Chakrapong launched the Khmer Soul Party . After the Khmer Soul Party failed to win any seats in the 2003 general elections , Chakrapong dissolved the party and returned to Funcinpec in March 2004 . In May 2005 , Chakrapong was appointed to the newly minted party post of general @-@ inspector . In January 2006 , Chakrapong was elected senator for Prey Veng Province , and was subsequently appointed the first vice @-@ president of the senate . Two months later , Ranariddh nominated him to run for the post of secretary @-@ general , but faced opposition from some senior party members such as Nhek Bun Chhay and Lu <unk> . Within a week of Chakrapong 's nomination , the finance ministry issued a bill calling for him to pay up due taxes from a failed airline business venture , prompting Chakrapong to withdraw his candidacy for the secretary @-@ general post . 
 In May 2006 , an anonymous letter from the Ministry of Information was circulated within the party , stating Ranariddh 's purported intention to form a new royalist party . Nhek Bun Chhay followed the issue closely and provided a list of party members who were planning to defect from Funcinpec , which included <unk> <unk> and Chakrapong . At the same time , Nhek Bun Chhay appointed <unk> <unk> party spokesman , while re @-@ designating the then @-@ incumbent party spokesman Chea <unk> the personal spokesman for Ranariddh . The cascade of incidents from Nhek Bun Chhay stoked anger from <unk> <unk> and Chakrapong who threatened to sue him . When Ranariddh was fired from his position as the president of Funcinpec in October 2006 , Chakrapong was also expelled from the party and senate the following month . 
 Within days after his expulsion , Chakrapong joined Ranariddh to form the Norodom Ranariddh Party ( NRP ) , and was in turn appointed the party 's vice president . Ranariddh had been issued two lawsuits over embezzlement of property and adultery , and Chakrapong publicly defended Ranariddh , saying that the lawsuits were politically motivated . After Ranariddh sought exile in Malaysia in March 2007 following his conviction over his embezzlement charges , Chakrapong served as the party 's acting president . In the same month , Hun Sen reopened the case on Chakrapong 's debts and filed legal charges against him . When the commune elections were held in April 2007 , Chakrapong led the NRP to secure 472 out of 11 @,@ 459 commune councilor seats available . Following the commune elections , Chakrapong resigned from the NRP in June 2007 . 
 = = Business career = = 
 In October 1999 , Chakrapong founded Royal Phnom Penh Airways . Chakrapong raised US $ 2 million from personal savings and bank loans , which he used to acquire one 52 @-@ seater Antonov @-@ 24 and another 100 @-@ seater Yakovlev Yak @-@ 42 airplanes . The airlines flew domestic routes within the first year of operations and most of its customers were Chinese , Taiwanese , and Japanese tourists . By May 2001 , Royal Phnom Penh Airways secured three tenders to fly between Phnom Penh – Bangkok , Phnom Penh – Ho Chi Minh City as well as Ho Chi Minh City – Siem Reap . The airlines attempted to secure two additional routes from the Cambodian government — Bangkok @-@ Siem Reap in August 2001 and Siem Reap @-@ Bangkok in August 2002 — but lost both bids to other airlines . Chakrapong accused the government political bias in awarding the deals due to his political affiliations . In October 2003 , the director of Battambang Airport , Prum <unk> , reported that Royal Phnom Penh Airways had accumulated $ 1 million in unpaid taxes . Chakrapong suspended domestic flights between Phnom Penh and Battambang as foreign tourists opted for land transport options to provincial capitals which were cheaper than air transport . Royal Phnom Penh Airways had already become bankrupt by March 2006 when the government presented Chakrapong a bill of $ 1 @.@ 36 million in unpaid taxes , navigation , and landing fees . When Chakrapong failed to repay the taxes to the government , Hun Sen issued a lawsuit in March 2007 against him . 
 = = Palace relations = = 
 = = = Awards and appointments = = = 
 Chakrapong was bestowed the title of <unk> Krom Khun in February 1994 , which translates as " The Great Prince " . Chakrapong was given the royal title of Samdech Preah <unk> in August 2004 by Sihanouk shortly before the latter handed over the throne to Sihamoni . After Chakrapong announced his retirement from politics in 2007 , Chakrapong was appointed as a privy councilor of the Supreme Privy Council of Cambodia with the rank equivalent to Deputy Prime Minister . He also established a foundation named after his older brother , the Norodom Racvivong Foundation , to support charitable and humanitarian initiatives for the poor . 
 = = = Succession debates to the throne = = = 
 In the 1990s , a public debate on ensued in Cambodia over the succession to the royal throne after Sihanouk was diagnosed with multiple health problems . Unlike Ranariddh or Sihamoni , Chakrapong was not a popular candidate , and a poll in 1995 by the Khmer Journalists ' Association showed that only 6 % out of 700 respondents supported Chakrapong 's candidacy to the throne . Julio Jeldres , Sihanouk 's official biographer , expressed in 1999 that Chakrapong had little chance of becoming the next king due to his involvement in the 1994 coup attempt . In August 2002 , Chakrapong raised the idea of holding national elections to choose a successor , and expressed concern over political interference in the Cambodian throne council . Chakrapong 's proposal had the support of Jeldres and Son Chhay , an opposition member of parliament who expressed similar concerns , but was opposed by Hun Sen. 
 = = Family = = 
 Chakrapong 's mother , Sisowath Pongsanmoni , was the younger half @-@ sister of Sisowath Kossamak . Kossamak is the mother of Sihanouk , and both Pongsanmoni and Kossamak had the same father , Sisowath Monivong . Pongsanmoni died in 1974 . Chakrapong has six full siblings , consisting of three brothers ( <unk> , Racvivong and <unk> ) and three younger sisters ( Sorya <unk> , Kantha Bopha and <unk> Bopha ) . <unk> , Sorya <unk> and <unk> Bopha were killed by the Khmer Rouge , while Racvivong and Kantha Bopha died young of illness . <unk> is Chakrapong 's sole surviving full sibling , and Chakrapong has six other half @-@ siblings by Sihanouk 's unions with different wives . 
 Chakrapong married seven times and had thirteen children . Between 1963 and 1967 , Chakrapong married three times and remained in three separate polygamous unions into the 1970s : Hun Soeun , a ballet dancer from the Royal Ballet of Cambodia ; <unk> Tioulong , the daughter of <unk> Tioulong ; and Duong Diyath . In 1974 , Chakrapong married Duong <unk> in Beijing , while in the 1984 and 1990s Chakrapong married <unk> Duangchan ( a Thai national ) , and Monirem respectively . Chakrapong married <unk> , another Thai lady after his divorce from Duangchan . 
 In December 2005 , Thai journalists reported that <unk> Duangchan had sought refuge in Thailand . Duangchan alleged that Chakrapong had kept her in confinement since 1993 , and she was not allowed to go out without escort by other family members or guards . She stated that the confinement started shortly after she filed for divorce from Chakrapong . When news reached Chakrapong and their son Charuchak , both of them refuted the allegations . In June 2007 , Charuchak was arrested and briefly detained by police for allegedly participating in organised crime and gang violence . The then @-@ second deputy president of NRP , Sisowath <unk> suggested that Charuchak 's arrest might have been politically motivated . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 HRH Prince Norodom <unk> ( born 1966 , by Hun Soeun ) 
 HRH Princess Norodom Nanda Devi ( born 1966 , by <unk> Tioulong ) 
 HRH Prince Norodom <unk> ( born 1967 , by Hun Soeun ) 
 HRH Prince Norodom <unk> ( born 1970 , by Hun Soeun ) 
 HRH Princess Norodom <unk> ( born 1969 , by Diyath ) 
 HRH Princess Norodom <unk> ( born 1971 , by Diyath ) 
 HRH Prince Norodom <unk> ( born 1972 , by Hun Soeun ) 
 HRH Princess Norodom <unk> ( born 1972 , by Diyath ) 
 HRH Prince Norodom <unk> ( born 1974 , by Hun Soeun ) 
 HRH Prince Norodom <unk> ( born 1975 , by Duong <unk> ) 
 HRH Prince Norodom <unk> ( born 1985 , by <unk> <unk> ) 
 HRH Princess Norodom <unk> ( born 1997 , by Monirem ) 
 HRH Prince Norodom <unk> ( born 2000 , by Monirem ) 
 = The Wild Bunch = 
 The Wild Bunch is a 1969 American epic Western Technicolor and Panavision film directed by Sam Peckinpah about an aging outlaw gang on the Texas – Mexico border , trying to exist in the changing modern world of 1913 . The film was controversial because of its graphic violence and its portrayal of crude men attempting to survive by any available means . 
 The movie , whose screenplay was written by Peckinpah and Walon Green , stars William Holden , Robert Ryan , Ernest Borgnine , Ben Johnson and Warren Oates . It was filmed in Mexico , notably at the Hacienda Ciénaga del Carmen ( deep in the desert between Torreón and Saltillo , Coahuila ) and on the Rio Nazas . 
 The Wild Bunch is noted for intricate , multi @-@ angle , quick @-@ cut editing , using normal and slow motion images , a revolutionary cinema technique in 1969 . The writing of Green , Peckinpah , and Roy N. Sickner was nominated for a best @-@ screenplay Academy Award , and the music by Jerry Fielding was nominated for Best Original Score . Additionally , Peckinpah was nominated for an Outstanding Directorial Achievement award by the Directors Guild of America and cinematographer Lucien Ballard won the National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Cinematography . 
 In 1999 , the U.S. National Film Registry selected it for preservation in the Library of Congress as culturally , historically , and aesthetically significant . The film was ranked 80th in the American Film Institute 's 100 best American films , and the 69th most thrilling film . In 2008 , the AFI revealed its " 10 Top 10 " of the best ten films in ten genres : The Wild Bunch ranked as the sixth @-@ best Western . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 In Texas in 1913 , Pike Bishop ( William Holden ) , the leader of a gang of aging outlaws , is seeking retirement with one final score : the robbery of a railroad office containing a cache of silver . They are ambushed by Pike 's former partner , Deke Thornton ( Robert Ryan ) , who is leading a posse of bounty hunters hired and deputized by the railroad . A bloody shootout kills several of the gang . Pike uses a serendipitous temperance union parade to shield their getaway , and many citizens are killed in the crossfire . 
 Pike rides off with Dutch Engstrom ( Ernest Borgnine ) , brothers Lyle ( Warren Oates ) and <unk> Gorch ( Ben Johnson ) and Angel ( Jaime Sánchez ) , the only survivors . They are dismayed when the loot from the robbery turns out to be a decoy : steel washers instead of silver coin . The men reunite with old @-@ timer Freddie Sykes ( Edmond O 'Brien ) and head for Mexico . 
 Pike 's men cross the Rio Grande and take refuge that night in the village where Angel was born . The townsfolk are ruled by Gen. Mapache ( Emilio Fernández ) , a corrupt , brutal general in the Mexican Federal Army , who has been ravaging the area 's villages to feed his troops , who have been fighting — and losing to — the forces of revolutionary Pancho Villa . Pike 's gang makes contact with the general . A jealous Angel spots Teresa , his former lover , in Mapache 's arms and shoots her dead , angering Mapache . Pike defuses the situation and offers to work for Mapache . Their task is to steal a weapons shipment from a U.S. Army train so that Mapache can resupply his troops and appease Col. Mohr ( Fernando Wagner ) , his German military adviser , who wishes to obtain samples of America 's armaments . The reward will be a cache of gold coins . 
 Angel gives up his share of the gold to Pike in return for sending one crate of the stolen rifles and ammunition to a band of rebels opposed to Mapache . The holdup goes largely as planned until Deke 's posse turns up on the very train the gang has robbed . The posse chases them to the Mexican border , only to be foiled again as the robbers blow up a trestle spanning the Rio Grande , dumping the entire posse into the river . The pursuers temporarily regroup at a riverside camp and then quickly take off again after the Bunch . 
 Pike and his men , knowing they risk being double @-@ crossed by Mapache , devise a way of bringing him the stolen weapons — including an ( anachronistic ) Browning M1917 machine gun — without him double @-@ crossing them . However , Mapache learns from the mother of Teresa that Angel embezzled a crate of guns and ammo , and reveals this as Angel and Engstrom deliver the last of the weapons . Surrounded by Mapache 's army , Angel desperately tries to escape , only to be captured and tortured . Mapache lets Engstrom go , and he returns to rejoin Pike 's gang and tell them what happened . 
 Sykes is wounded by Deke 's posse while securing spare horses . The rest of Pike 's gang returns to Agua Verde for shelter , where a bacchanal celebrating the weapons transfer has commenced ; they see Angel being dragged on the ground by a rope tied behind the general 's car . After a brief frolic with prostitutes and a period of reflection , Pike and the gang try to forcibly persuade Mapache to release Angel , barely alive after the torture . The general appears to comply ; however , as they watch , the general cuts his throat instead . Pike and the gang angrily gun Mapache down in front of hundreds of his men . For a moment , the <unk> are so shocked that they fail to return fire , causing Engstrom to laugh in surprise . Pike calmly takes aim at Mohr and kills him , too . This results in a violent , bloody shootout — dominated by the machine gun — in which Pike and his men are killed , along with many of Mapache 's troops and the remaining German adviser . 
 Deke finally catches up . He allows the remaining members of the posse to take the bullet @-@ riddled bodies of the gang members back and collect the reward , while electing to stay behind , knowing what awaits the posse . After a period , Sykes arrives with a band of the previously seen Mexican rebels , who have killed off what 's left of the posse along the way . Sykes asks Deke to come along and join the revolution . Deke smiles and rides off with them . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Casting = = 
 Director Sam Peckinpah considered many actors for the Pike Bishop role , before casting William Holden : Richard Boone , Sterling Hayden , Charlton Heston , Burt Lancaster , Lee Marvin , Robert Mitchum , Gregory Peck , and James Stewart . Marvin actually accepted the role but pulled out after he was offered a larger pay deal to star in Paint Your Wagon ( 1969 ) . 
 Peckinpah 's first two choices for the role of Deke Thornton were Richard Harris ( who had co @-@ starred in Major Dundee ) and Brian Keith ( who had worked with Peckinpah on The Westerner ( 1960 ) and The Deadly Companions ( 1961 ) ) . Harris was never formally approached , but Keith was , and turned the part down . Robert Ryan was ultimately cast in the part after Peckinpah saw him in the World War II action movie The Dirty Dozen ( 1967 ) . Other actors considered for the role were Henry Fonda , Glenn Ford , Van Heflin , Ben Johnson ( later cast as <unk> Gorch ) , and Arthur Kennedy . 
 Mario <unk> was considered for the part of Mapache , but the role went to Emilio Fernández , the Mexican film director and actor and friend of Peckinpah . 
 Among those considered to play Dutch Engstrom were Charles Bronson , Jim Brown , Alex Cord , Robert Culp , Sammy Davis , Jr . , Richard <unk> , Steve McQueen , and George Peppard . Ernest Borgnine was cast based on his performance in The Dirty Dozen ( 1967 ) . 
 Robert Blake was the original choice to play Angel , but he asked for too much money . Peckinpah had seen Jaime Sánchez in the Broadway production of Sidney Lumet 's The Pawnbroker , was impressed , and demanded he be cast as Angel . 
 Albert Dekker , a stage actor , was cast as Harrigan , the railroad detective . He died months after filming ; The Wild Bunch was his final film . 
 Bo Hopkins played the part of Clarence " Crazy " Lee ; he was cast after Peckinpah saw him on television . 
 Warren Oates played Lyle Gorch , having previously worked with Peckinpah on the TV series The Rifleman and his previous films , Ride the High Country ( 1962 ) and Major Dundee ( 1965 ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 In 1967 , Warner Bros.-Seven Arts producers Kenneth Hyman and Phil Feldman were interested in having Sam Peckinpah rewrite and direct an adventure film called The Diamond Story . A professional outcast due to the production difficulties of his previous film Major Dundee ( 1965 ) and his firing from the set of The Cincinnati Kid ( 1965 ) , Peckinpah 's stock had improved following his critically acclaimed work on the television film Noon Wine ( 1966 ) . An alternative screenplay available at the studio was The Wild Bunch , written by Roy Sickner and Walon Green . At the time , William Goldman 's screenplay Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid had recently been purchased by 20th Century Fox . It was quickly decided that The Wild Bunch , which had several similarities to Goldman 's work , would be produced in order to beat Butch Cassidy to the theaters . 
 By the fall of 1967 , Peckinpah was rewriting the screenplay and preparing for the production . The principal photography was shot entirely on location in Mexico , most notably at the Hacienda Ciénaga del Carmen ( deep in the desert between Torreón and Saltillo , Coahuila ) and on the Rio Nazas . Peckinpah 's epic work was inspired by his hunger to return to films , the violence seen in Arthur Penn 's Bonnie and Clyde ( 1967 ) , and America 's growing frustration with the Vietnam War and what he perceived to be the utter lack of reality seen in Westerns up to that time . He set out to make a film which portrayed not only the vicious violence of the period , but as well the crude men attempting to survive the era . Multiple scenes attempted in Major Dundee , including slow motion action sequences ( inspired by Akira Kurosawa 's work in Seven Samurai ( 1954 ) ) , characters leaving a village as if in a funeral procession and the use of inexperienced locals as extras , would become fully realized in The Wild Bunch . 
 The film was shot with the anamorphic process . Peckinpah and his cinematographer , Lucien Ballard , also made use of telephoto lenses , that allowed for objects and people in both the background and foreground to be compressed in perspective . The effect is best seen in the shots where the Bunch makes " the walk " to Mapache 's headquarters to free Angel . As they walk forward , a constant flow of people passes between them and the camera ; most of the people in the foreground are as sharply focused as the Bunch . The editing of the film is notable in that shots from multiple angles were spliced together in rapid succession , often at different speeds , placing greater emphasis on the chaotic nature of the action and the gunfights . 
 Lou Lombardo , having previously worked with Peckinpah on Noon Wine , was personally hired by the director to edit The Wild Bunch . Peckinpah had wanted an editor who would be loyal to him . Lombardo 's youth was also a plus , as he was not bound by traditional conventions . One of Lombardo 's first contributions was to show Peckinpah an episode of the TV series Felony Squad he edited in 1967 . The episode , entitled " My Mommy Got Lost " , included a slow motion sequence where Joe Don Baker is shot by the police . The scene mixed slow motion with normal speed , having been filmed at 24 frames per second but triple printed optically at 72 frames per second . Peckinpah was reportedly thrilled and told Lombardo : " Let 's try some of that when we get down to Mexico ! " The director would film the major shootouts with six cameras , operating at various film rates , including 24 frames per second , 30 frames per second , 60 frames per second , 90 frames per second , and 120 frames per second . When the scenes were eventually cut together , the action would shift from slow to fast to slower still , giving time an elastic quality never before seen in motion pictures up to that time . 
 By the time filming wrapped , Peckinpah had shot 333 @,@ 000 feet ( 101 @,@ 000 m ) of film with 1 @,@ 288 camera setups . Lombardo and Peckinpah remained in Mexico for six months editing the picture . After initial cuts , the opening gunfight sequence ran 21 minutes . By cutting frames from specific scenes and intercutting others , they were able to fine @-@ cut the opening robbery down to five minutes . The creative montage became the model for the rest of the film and would " forever change the way movies would be made " . Further editing was done to secure a favorable rating from the MPAA which was in the process of establishing a new set of codes . Peckinpah and his editors cut the film to satisfy the new , expansive R @-@ rating parameters which , for the first time , designated a film as being unsuitable for children . Without this new system in place , the film could not have been released with its explicit images of bloodshed . 
 Peckinpah stated that one of his goals for this movie was to give the audience " some idea of what it is to be gunned down " . A memorable incident occurred , to that end , as Peckinpah 's crew were consulting him on the " gunfire " effects to be used in the film . Not satisfied with the results from the squibs his crew had brought for him , Peckinpah became exasperated ; he finally hollered : " That 's not what I want ! That 's not what I want ! " He then grabbed a real revolver and fired it into a nearby wall . The gun empty , Peckinpah barked at his stunned crew : " THAT 'S the effect I want ! ! " He also had the gunfire sound effects changed for the film . Before , all gunshots in Warner Bros. movies sounded identical , regardless of the type of weapon being fired . Peckinpah insisted on each different type of firearm having its own specific sound effect when fired . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Critics of The Wild Bunch noted the theme of the end of the outlaw gunfighter era . Pike Bishop says , " We 've got to start thinking beyond our guns . Those days are closing fast . " The Bunch live by an anachronistic code of honor without a place in 20th @-@ century society . When they inspect Gen. Mapache 's new automobile , they perceive it marks the end of horse travel , a symbol also in Peckinpah 's Ride the High Country ( 1962 ) and The Ballad of Cable Hogue ( 1970 ) . 
 The violence that was much criticized in 1969 remains controversial . Peckinpah noted it was allegoric of the American war in Vietnam , the violence of which was nightly televised to American homes at supper time . He tried showing the gun violence commonplace to the historic western frontier period , rebelling against sanitized , bloodless television Westerns and films glamorizing gunfights and murder : " The point of the film is to take this façade of movie violence and open it up , get people involved in it so that they are starting to go in the Hollywood television predictable reaction syndrome , and then twist it so that it 's not fun anymore , just a wave of sickness in the gut . . . it 's ugly , brutalizing , and bloody awful ; it 's not fun and games and cowboys and Indians . It 's a terrible , ugly thing , and yet there 's a certain response that you get from it , an excitement , because we 're all violent people . " Peckinpah used violence as catharsis , believing his audience would be purged of violence , by witnessing it explicitly on screen . He later admitted to being mistaken , that the audience came to enjoy rather than be horrified by his films ' violence , something that troubled him . 
 Betrayal is the secondary theme of The Wild Bunch . The characters suffer from their knowledge of having betrayed a friend and left him to his fate , thus violating their own honor code when it suits them ( " $ 10 @,@ 000 cuts an awful lot of family ties " ) . However , Bishop says , " When you side with a man , you stay with him , and if you can 't do that you 're like some animal . " Such oppositional ideas lead to the film 's violent conclusion , as the remaining men find their abandonment of Angel intolerable . Bishop remembers his betrayals , most notably when he deserts Deke Thornton ( in flashback ) when the law catches up to them and when he abandons Crazy Lee at the railroad office after the robbery ( ostensibly to guard the hostages ) . Critic David Weddle writes that " like that of Conrad 's Lord Jim , Pike Bishop 's heroism is propelled by overwhelming guilt and a despairing death wish . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Vincent Canby began his review by calling the film " very beautiful and the first truly interesting American @-@ made Western in years . It 's also so full of <unk> an intensity that can hardly be supported by the <unk> it 's going to prompt a lot of people who do not know the real effect of movie violence ( as I do not ) to write automatic condemnations of it . " He said , " Although the movie 's conventional and poetic action sequences are extraordinarily good and its landscapes beautifully photographed . . . it is most interesting in its almost jolly account of chaos , corruption , and defeat " . Among the actors , he commented particularly on William Holden : " After years of giving bored performances in boring movies , Holden comes back gallantly in The Wild Bunch . He looks older and tired , but he has style , both as a man and as a movie character who persists in doing what he 's always done , not because he really wants the money but because there 's simply nothing else to do . " Time also liked Holden 's performance , describing it as his best since Stalag 17 ( a 1953 film that earned Holden an Oscar ) ; said Robert Ryan gave " the screen performance of his career " ; and concluded that " The Wild Bunch contains faults and mistakes " ( such as flashbacks " introduced with surprising clumsiness " ) , but " its accomplishments are more than sufficient to confirm that Peckinpah , along with Stanley Kubrick and Arthur Penn , belongs with the best of the newer generation of American filmmakers . " 
 In a 2002 retrospective Roger Ebert , who " saw the original version at the world premiere in 1969 , during the golden age of the junket , when Warner Bros. screened five of its new films in the Bahamas for 450 critics and reporters " , said that back then he had publicly declared the film a masterpiece during the junket 's press conference , prompted by comments from " a reporter from the Reader 's Digest [ who ] got up to ask ' Why was this film ever made ? ' " He compared the film to Pulp Fiction : " praised and condemned with equal vehemence . " 
 " What Citizen Kane was to movie lovers in 1941 , The Wild Bunch was to <unk> in 1969 , " wrote film critic Michael Sragow , adding that Peckinpah had " produced an American movie that equals or surpasses the best of Kurosawa : the <unk> of Westerns " . 
 = = = Box Office = = = 
 Produced on a budget of $ 6 million , the film grossed $ 10 @.@ 5 million at the US box office in 1970 and another $ 638 @,@ 641 in the US on its 1995 restored box @-@ office release , making a total of $ 11 @,@ 138 @,@ 641 . It was the 17th highest grossing film of 1969 . Today , the film holds a 98 % " Fresh " rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on reviews from 46 critics . 
 = = Documentary = = 
 Sam Peckinpah and the making of The Wild Bunch were the subjects of the documentary The Wild Bunch : An Album in Montage ( 1996 ) directed and edited by Paul Seydor ; the documentary was occasioned by the discovery of 72 minutes of silent , black @-@ and @-@ white film footage of Peckinpah and company on location in northern Mexico during the filming of The Wild Bunch . Michael Sragow wrote in 2000 that the documentary was " a wonderful introduction to Peckinpah ’ s radically detailed historical film about American outlaws in revolutionary <unk> masterpiece that ’ s part bullet @-@ driven ballet , part requiem for Old West friendship and part existential explosion . Seydor ’ s movie is also a poetic flight on the myriad possibilities of movie directing . " Seydor and his co @-@ producer Nick Redman were nominated in 1997 for the Academy Award for Best Documentary ( Short Subject ) . 
 = = Awards , honors , and nominations = = 
 Following its release , Peckinpah was one of ten directors to receive a nomination for the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film . The film received two Academy Award nominations , for Best Original Screenplay ( Walon Green , Roy N. Sickner , Sam Peckinpah ) and Best Original Music Score ( Jerry Fielding ) . At the 42nd Academy Awards ceremony , both awards went to crew members of Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid ( screenwriter William Goldman and composer Burt Bacharach ) . 
 Decades later the American Film Institute placed the film in several of its " 100 Years " lists : 
 AFI 's 100 Years … 100 Movies – # 80 
 AFI 's 100 Years … 100 Thrills – # 69 
 AFI 's 100 Years … 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) – # 79 
 AFI 's 10 Top 10 – # 6 Western 
 The film is ranked # 94 on Empire magazine 's list of the 500 Greatest Films of All Time . In 1999 , the U.S. National Film Registry selected it for preservation in the Library of Congress as culturally , historically , and aesthetically significant . 
 = = Versions = = 
 In 1993 , Warner Bros. resubmitted the film to the MPAA ratings board prior to an expected re @-@ release . To the studio 's surprise , the originally R @-@ rated film was given an NC @-@ 17 , delaying the release until the decision was appealed . The controversy was linked to 10 extra minutes added to the film , although none of this footage contained graphic violence . Warner Bros. trimmed some footage to decrease the running time to ensure additional daily screenings . When the restored film finally made it to the screen in March 1995 , one reviewer noted : 
 By restoring 10 minutes to the film , the complex story now fits together in a seamless way , filling in those gaps found in the previous theatrical release , and proving that Peckinpah was firing on all cylinders for this , his grandest achievement .... And the one overwhelming feature that the director 's cut makes unforgettable are the many faces of the children , whether playing , singing , or cowering , much of the reaction to what happens on @-@ screen is through the eyes , both innocent and imitative , of all the children . 
 Today , almost all of the versions of the film include the missing scenes . Warner Bros. released a newly restored version in a two @-@ disc special edition on January 10 , 2006 . It includes an audio commentary by Peckinpah scholars , two documentaries concerning the making of the film , and never @-@ before @-@ seen outtakes . 
 There have been several versions of the film : 
 The original , 1969 European release is 145 minutes long , with an intermission ( per distributor 's request , before the train robbery ) . 
 The original , 1969 American release is 143 minutes long . 
 The second , 1969 American release is 135 minutes long , shortened to allow more screenings . 
 The 1995 re @-@ release is 145 minutes long , identical to the 1969 European release , the version labeled " The Original Director 's Cut " , available in home video . 
 = = Remake = = 
 On January 19 , 2011 , it was announced by Warner Bros. that a remake of The Wild Bunch was in the works . Screenwriter Brian Helgeland was hired to develop a new script . The 2012 suicide of Tony Scott , who was scheduled to direct , put the project in limbo . 
 On May 15 , 2013 , The Wrap reported that Will Smith was in talks to star in and produce the remake . The new version involves drug cartels and follows a disgraced DEA agent who assembles a team to go after a Mexican drug lord and his fortune . No director has been chosen , and a new screenwriter is being sought . 
 = The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 2 – Black Oil = 
 Volume 2 of The X @-@ Files Mythology collection is the second DVD release containing selected episodes from the third to the fifth seasons of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episodes collected in the release form the middle of the series ' mythology , and are centered on the discovery of a mind @-@ altering extraterrestrial " black oil " . 
 The collection contains five episodes from the third season , eight from the fourth season , and two from the fifth . The episodes follow the investigations of paranormal @-@ related cases , or X @-@ Files , by FBI Special Agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . Events covered in the episodes include the assassination of a secretive informant , Scully 's diagnosis with cancer and Mulder 's apparent suicide . 
 Production for many of the episode 's included in the collection required extensive effects . The titular black oil 's on @-@ screen appearance was achieved through visual effects ; the shimmering oil effect was digitally placed over the actors ' corneas in post @-@ production . Steven Williams , William B. Davis , Mitch Pileggi and Laurie Holden all play supporting roles in the collection . Released on August 2 , 2005 , the collection received mostly positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The collection opens with the two @-@ part episodes " Nisei " and " 731 " . Investigating evidence of an alien autopsy , FBI special agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) infiltrates a secretive government train carriage carrying an alien @-@ human hybrid . Mulder is almost killed by a Syndicate operative guarding the hybrid , but is saved by his informant X ( Steven Williams ) . X had been tipped off about Mulder 's activities by the agent 's partner Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . Scully , meanwhile , meets a group of women with abduction experiences similar to her own , and meets another member of the Syndicate known as the First Elder ( Don S. Williams ) , who claims during her abduction she was placed on a similar train car and experimented upon by the Japanese scientists . 
 The crew of a French salvage ship trying to raise a World War II – era submarine from the sea floor are stricken with massive radiation burns — except for one , who has been infected with a parasitic black oil discovered on the submarine . The oil , controlling the crewman 's body , passes into the crewman 's wife and travels to Hong Kong in pursuit of a middleman selling government secrets , who Mulder has also been pursuing . After Mulder catches Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) in Hong Kong , the oil passes itself to Krycek . Scully finds that the submarine had been involved in discovering the oil on the sea floor during World War II , under the guise of finding a sunken fighter plane . The infected Krycek makes his way to a missile silo used to hide a UFO , and the oil escapes his body to board the craft . Meanwhile , Scully has tracked down Luis Cardinal , the man responsible for killing her sister . 
 When the Syndicate suspect that one of their members is passing information to Mulder and Scully , they organise a canary trap to find the leak , using information about the safety of Mulder 's mother as bait . X 's role as an informant is discovered , and he is shot dead , although he is able to pass along the name of another informant who can be of use to Mulder — Marita Covarrubias ( Laurie Holden ) , the Special Representative to the Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations . Covarrubias ' aid is sought when Mulder attempts to reach Tunguska in Russia to investigate the source of a further black oil contamination . Whilst there , Mulder is held in a gulag and used as a successful test subject for a black oil vaccine . He escapes and is able to return to America , having found that Krycek is working with the Russians . 
 Having been diagnosed with cancer , Scully is unsure of her future with the FBI . Mulder is convinced that her condition is a result of her earlier abduction , and is prepared to make a deal with the Syndicate to find a cure . He is dissuaded by Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) , who secretly makes such a deal instead . While being pursued by an assassin responsible for a hoax alien corpse discovered on a mountaintop , Mulder fakes his own suicide , mutilating the assassin 's face to provide a decoy body . He uses the distraction this offers to infiltrate The Pentagon to find a cure for Scully 's cancer , while Scully is able to uncover and reveal a Syndicate connection within the FBI . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the third season the black oil was introduced , an alien entity that invaded bodies and made them into living hosts . The black oil was able to enter through a victim 's mouth , eyes or nose ; it would leave a victim 's body to revert to its original form or find a new host . The oil is revealed to be a tool used by the Colonists , brought to Earth by meteorites to create hosts of the human population living there . The fourth season episodes " Tunguska " and " Terma " were conceived by the writers when they were trying to conceive a " big and fun canvas " to tell stories . They decided to create a story which had connections to the Russian gulags , which led to the " natural " idea that the Russians were experimenting separately from the Syndicate to create a vaccine for the black oil . Writer John Shiban felt it was natural creating an arms race @-@ like story between the United States and Russia , being that the Cold War had ended a few years earlier . The inspiration for the oil @-@ containing rocks was NASA 's announcement of possible evidence of extraterrestrial life in the Allan Hills 84001 meteorite ; while the gulag scenes were based on Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn 's books The Gulag Archipelago and One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich 
 The on @-@ screen appearance of the black oil was achieved through visual effects ; the shimmering oil effect was digitally placed over the actors ' corneas in post @-@ production . The crew went through various iterations to find the two " right " types of fluids . According to physical effects crewman David Gauthier , they used a mix of oil and acetone , which he believed gave the substance a more globular look . During the filming of " Apocrypha " , Nicholas Lea was fitted with a mask with tubes for the scene where the alien black oil leaves his body . Lea said filming the scene was horrible , and the scene ended up having to be filmed again a few days later . A similar scene from the start of the episode with the submarine captain was accomplished using a dummy head . 
 The decision to have the character of X killed off in " Herrenvolk " was made at the end of the third season . The writers felt that they could only do so much with the character and decided that they would either make him a bigger character in the series , or have him pay the price for collaborating with Mulder . The show 's producers decided to give Gillian Anderson 's character Dana Scully cancer early in the fourth season . Carter initially discussed giving Scully 's mother cancer but decided to have Scully suffer from it instead . Carter felt the move would give the show an interesting platform on which to discuss things such as faith , science , health care and a certain element of the paranormal . Some of the writing staff felt that the decision was a poor one to make , citing it as " a cheap TV thing " . However , Frank Spotnitz felt that , given the appearances of cancer @-@ stricken abductees in previous episodes , it was an " obligatory " move to have Scully follow suit . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Released on August 2 , 2005 , the collection has received generally positive reviews from critics . Slant Magazine 's Keith Uhlich rated it three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , noting that there is " an unabashed confidence to these episodes " , although this " comes with something of a price as the thrill and surprise of season two mythology stories like " Colony " and " End Game " are replaced by a nagging suspicion that the writers are starting to tread water " . Uhlich singles out " Talitha Cumi " as the collection 's highlight , calling it " an overall <unk> " . Writing for DVD Talk , Jeffrey Robinson was impressed with the collection , calling it " highly recommended " . However , he felt that the cohesion between the episodes was lacking somewhat , and that the two @-@ part episodes " Tempus Fugit " and " Max " did not add much to the overall storyline . Exclaim ! ' s Monica S. Kuebler , on the other hand , felt negatively about the collection . She too felt that the interrupted nature of the episodes caused a lack of " believable " pacing , and noted that the release " feels like a blatant cash grab by Fox to milk an old franchise while they still can " . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Special features = = 
 = Verna Fields = 
 Verna Fields ( née Hellman , 21 March 1918 – 30 November 1982 ) was an American film editor , film and television sound editor , educator , and entertainment industry executive . In the first phase of her career , from 1954 through to about 1970 , Fields mostly worked on smaller projects that gained little recognition . She was the sound editor for several television shows in the 1950s . She worked on independent films ( including The Savage Eye ( 1959 ) ) , on government @-@ supported documentaries of the 1960s , and on some minor studio films such as Peter Bogdanovich 's first film , Targets ( 1968 ) . For several years in the late 1960s , she was a film instructor at the University of Southern California . Her one major studio film , El Cid , led to her only industry recognition in this phase of her career , which was the 1962 Golden Reel award for sound editing . 
 Fields came into prominence as a film editor and industry executive during the ' New Hollywood ' era ( 1968 – 1982 ) . She had established close ties with the directors Peter Bogdanovich , George Lucas , and Steven Spielberg early in their careers , and became known as their " mother cutter " ; the term " cutter " is an informal variation of " film editor " . The critical and commercial success of the films What 's Up , Doc ? ( 1972 ) , American Graffiti ( 1973 ) , and Jaws ( 1975 ) brought Fields a level of recognition that appears to be unique among film editors . Jaws in particular was enormously and unexpectedly profitable , and ushered in the era of the " summer blockbuster " film . Fields ' contributions to this success were widely acknowledged . She received an Academy Award and an American Cinema Editors Award for best editing for the film . Within a year of the film 's release , she had been appointed as Vice @-@ President for Feature Production at Universal Studios . She was thus among the first women to enter upper @-@ level management in the entertainment industry . Her career as an executive at Universal continued until her death in 1982 at age 64 . 
 = = Early life , education , and training = = 
 Verna Hellman was born in St. Louis , Missouri . She was the daughter of Selma ( née Schwartz ) and Samuel Hellman , who was then working as a journalist for the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch and the Saturday Evening Post . Sam Hellman subsequently moved his family to Hollywood , where he became a prolific screenwriter . Verna Hellman graduated from the University of Southern California with a B.A. in journalism . She then held several positions at 20th Century Fox , including being the assistant sound editor on Fritz Lang 's 1944 film The Woman in the Window . In 1946 , she married the film editor Sam Fields and stopped working . The Fields had two sons ; one of them , Richard Fields , became a film editor . In 1954 , Sam Fields died of a heart attack at the age of 38 . 
 = = Career in sound editing = = 
 Following her husband 's death , Fields began a career as a television sound editor working on such shows as Death Valley Days and the children 's programs Sky King and Fury . She installed a film editing lab in her home so that she could work at night while her children were young ; she told them that she was the " Queen of Saturday morning " . 
 By 1956 , she was working on films as well . Her first credit as a sound editor was for Fritz Lang 's While the City Sleeps . She worked on the experimental documentary The Savage Eye ( 1959 ) ; the co @-@ directors Ben Maddow , Sidney Meyers , and Joseph Strick and the other connections she made on this film were important to her subsequent career . In 1962 Fields won the Motion Picture Sound Editors ' Golden Reel Award for the film El Cid ( directed by Anthony Mann ) . 
 Following El Cid , Fields was the sound editor on several lesser @-@ known films , including the experimental film The Balcony ( 1963 ) with her Savage Eye colleagues Strick and Maddow . Peter Bogdanovich 's first , low @-@ budget film Targets ( 1968 ) was one of her last sound @-@ editing projects , and represents her mature work . Bill Warren has described the scene in which the character Bobby starts sniping at freeway drivers from the top of a large oil storage tank : " The sound is mono , and brilliantly mixed -- the entire sequence of Bobby shooting from the tanks was shot without sound . Verna Fields , then a sound editor , added all the sound effects . The result is seamlessly realistic , from the scrape of the guns on the metal of the tanks , to the crack of the rifles , to the little gasps Bobby makes just before firing . " 
 = = Film editing and teaching = = 
 Fields ' career as a film editor commenced in 1960 , when the director Irving Lerner recruited her to be the editor of the film Studs <unk> ; Fields and Lerner had both worked on The Savage Eye . In 1963 she edited An Affair of the Skin , which was directed by Ben Maddow ( another Savage Eye contact ) . Over the next five years , Fields edited several other independent films ; the best known is The Legend of the Boy and the Eagle ( 1967 ) , which was shown on the television program Walt Disney 's Wonderful World of Color . She also made documentaries funded by the United States government through the Office of Economic Opportunity ( <unk> ) , the United States Information Agency ( USIA ) , and the U.S. Department of Health , Education , and Welfare ( HEW ) . 
 Starting in the mid @-@ 1960s , Fields taught film editing at the University of Southern California ( USC ) . Douglas Gomery wrote of her time at USC that : " Her greatest impact came when she began to teach film editing to a generation of students at the University of Southern California . She then operated on the fringes of the film business , for a time making documentaries for the Office of Economic Opportunity . The end of that Federal Agency pushed her back into mainstream Hollywood then being overrun by her former USC students . " Fields ' students had included Matthew Robbins , Willard Huyck , Gloria Katz , John Milius , and George Lucas . 
 Fields left no written lectures from her USC years , but a transcript exists from a 1975 seminar that she gave at the American Film Institute . In one characteristic excerpt she said that , " There 's a feeling of movement in telling a story and there is a flow . A cut that is off @-@ rhythm will be disturbing and you will feel it , unless you want it to be like that . On Jaws , each time I wanted to cut I didn 't , so that it would have an anticipatory feeling — and it worked . " 
 In 1971 Peter Bogdanovich , with whom Fields had worked on Targets , recruited her to edit What 's Up , Doc ? ( 1972 ) ; Bogdanovich had edited his previous films himself . The film was very successful , and is now considered as the second of Bogdanovich 's ' golden period ' that commenced with The Last Picture Show ( 1971 ) . What 's Up , Doc ? established Fields as an editor on studio films . She subsequently edited Bogdanovich 's final golden period film , Paper Moon ( 1973 ) , as well as his less successful film Daisy Miller ( 1974 ) . 
 = = George Lucas and American Graffiti = = 
 In 1967 , Fields had hired George Lucas to help edit Journey to the Pacific ( 1968 ) , which was a documentary film that she 'd directed for the USIA . She had also hired Marcia Griffin for the job , and introduced Griffin and George Lucas ; they subsequently married . In 1972 , Lucas was directing American Graffiti . While Lucas had intended that his wife would edit the film , Universal Studios asked him to add Verna Fields to the editing team . Over the first ten weeks of post @-@ production , George and Marcia Lucas , along with Fields and Walter Murch ( as sound editor ) , pieced together the original , 165 @-@ minute version of the film . Each of more than 40 scenes in the film had a continuously playing background song that had been popular around 1962 , when the film 's story was set . Michael Sragow has characterized the effect as " using rock ' n roll as a Greek chorus with a beat " . 
 Fields then left American Graffiti . It took another six months of editing to create a shorter , 110 @-@ minute version of the film , but upon its release in 1973 American Graffiti was extremely successful both with critics and at the box office . Shortly after its release , Roger Greenspun described the film and its editing : " American Graffiti exists not so much in its individual stories as in its orchestration of many stories , its sense of time and place . Although it is full of the material of fashionable nostalgia , it never exploits nostalgia . In its feeling for movement and music and the vitality of the night — and even in its vision in white — it is oddly closer to some early Fellini than to the recent American past of , say , The Last Picture Show or Summer of ' 42 . " 
 Verna Fields and Marcia Lucas were nominated for an Academy Award for Film Editing in 1974 for their work on American Graffiti ; while the film won no Academy Awards , both of the <unk> , Murch , and Fields all won Academy Awards for later work . The commercial success of the film gave George Lucas the opportunity to direct his next film , Star Wars . 
 = = Steven Spielberg and Jaws = = 
 Fields edited Steven Spielberg 's first major film , The Sugarland Express ( 1974 ) . She became widely celebrated for her work as the film editor on Spielberg 's next film , Jaws ( 1975 ) , for which she won both the Academy Award for Film Editing and the American Cinema Editors Eddie Award in 1976 . Leonard Maltin has characterized her editing as " sensational " . Gerald Peary , who interviewed Fields in 1980 , wrote that , " Jaws scared the world , brought in a fortune for Universal , and made Verna Fields , who won an Academy Award , about as famous ' overnight ' as an editor ever gets . " He then quoted Fields as saying that , " Steven told me it was because I had cut the first picture that was a monumental success in which you can really see the editing . And people discovered that it was a woman who edited Jaws . " 
 The editing of Jaws has been intensely studied for over thirty years . In film editor Susan Korda 's 2005 lecture , " We 'll Fix It in the Edit ! ? " , at the Berlinale Talent Campus , she broadly explained the contribution of editing to the film : " What is fascinating in Jaws is that the shark has a personality , the shark has an intelligence , indeed sometimes I think the shark has a sense of humor , morbid as it might be . And that was all achieved in the first two acts of the film before you see the shark . So the cutting was very essential for that . " David Bordwell has used the second shark attack scene in Jaws as ( literally ) a textbook illustration of an editing innovation that occurred in the late 1960s . The innovation , which Fields herself named the " wipe by cut " , can be used when a character is filmed from a distance using a telephoto lens . The cut to a different framing of the character occurs during the interruption by a figure who passes between the camera and the character . The cut thus masks itself , and avoids drawing the viewer 's attention away from the narrative of the scene . 
 The critic David Edelstein 's affectionate comments on Jaws and its editing are also a good indication of the film 's lasting influence 30 years after its release : 
 Jaws is still one of my favorite movies . I didn 't know I could be manipulated like that — so wittily , so teasingly , in a way that made me laugh at my own fear . ( The only Hitchcock film I 'd seen in a theater was Frenzy , which was too sick to appreciate in the same vein . ) What clinched it was that unbelievably brilliant sequence that begins with a high @-@ angle shot of Roy Scheider dropping fish entrails in the water as shark bait . He was resentful ; he said to Shaw and Dreyfuss , " Why don 't you guys come down here and shovel some of this shit ? " And we started to laugh — he said " shit ! " heh @-@ heh — and then the head of the shark appeared in the water ( no music , no foreshadowing ) , and I felt my mind detach from my body and my laugh turn into a shriek and merge into the collective shriek of everyone in that huge theater . I literally shook for the rest of the movie : Every cut by the late Verna Fields had me poised to leap out of my seat . ( I really learned to appreciate editing from Jaws . ) 
 On a 2012 listing of the 75 best edited films of all time that was compiled by the Motion Picture Editors Guild , Jaws was listed eighth . 
 = = Management for Universal Studios = = 
 Shortly after the completion of Jaws in 1975 , Fields was hired by Universal Studios as an executive consultant . Some insight into Universal 's reasons for hiring her can be gleaned from the fact that during the filming of Jaws , in addition to her editing , Fields had been " omnipresent ... at Spielberg 's beck and call by means of a walkie @-@ talkie . Often she would shuttle back and forth on her bike between the producers in town and Spielberg at the dock for last @-@ minute decisions " . The producers of Jaws were David Brown and Richard Zanuck . Along with Brown , Zanuck , and Peter Benchley ( the book 's author ) , Fields helped promote Jaws on the " talk show circuit " in the eight months before its saturation release to 464 theaters on 20 June 1975 . Fields had plainly earned the confidence of the producers and of the studio executives at Universal . 
 Throughout her career , Fields had worked independently , but in 1976 , and following the unexpected success of Jaws , she accepted a position as the Feature @-@ Production Vice @-@ President with Universal . She was thus among the first women to hold high executive positions with the major studios . In a 1982 interview , Fields was quoted as saying , " I got a lot of credit for Jaws , rightly or wrongly . " 
 Fields had come " up from the cutting room floor " and out of the customary , near @-@ anonymity of film editors . Regarding this change in her career path , Fields told Peary in 1980 that " All these young filmmakers are possessive . They feel I belong to them , and they feel a certain resentment - that I went to the other side . In calmer moments , of course , they know it isn 't true , that I can do more for them now . " Of Fields ' work at Universal , Joel Schumacher was quoted in 1982 as saying : " In the record business , you have Berry Gordy and Ahmet Ertegün . They 're executives who actually made records . In the movie business , as an executive who 's worked with film , you have only Verna . She saves Universal a fortune ... every day . " 
 = = Final cuts = = 
 In 1981 , she was awarded the Women in Film Crystal Award for outstanding women who , through their endurance and the excellence of their work , have helped to expand the role of women within the entertainment industry . 
 Fields held her position as a Vice @-@ President at Universal until her death in 1982 . Jaws was the last film that she edited . There had apparently been some discussion that Fields might edit Spielberg 's next film , Close Encounters of the Third Kind ( 1977 ) , but Michael Kahn edited that film , and went on to edit all but one of Spielberg 's films for the next thirty years . After John D. Hancock , the initial director of Jaws 2 , was sacked , it was suggested that Fields co @-@ direct it with Joe Alves . Jeannot Szwarc , however , was hired to complete the film . 
 Fields died of cancer in Encino , California in 1982 . In her honor , Universal Studios named a building at its Universal City , California lot the " Verna Fields Building " ; it lies immediately across from the Alfred Hitchcock Building . The Motion Picture Sound Editors ( MPSE ) sponsor an annual Verna Fields Award for Student Sound Editing . The Women in Film Foundation , which honored Fields with its Crystal Award in 1981 , presently administers the Verna Fields Memorial Fellowship for women film students at UCLA . 
 = = Selected filmography ( editor ) = = 
 = Battle of Manzikert = 
 The Battle of Manzikert was fought between the Byzantine Empire and the Seljuq Turks on August 26 , 1071 near Manzikert ( modern <unk> in Muş Province , Turkey ) . The decisive defeat of the Byzantine army and the capture of the Emperor Romanos IV Diogenes played an important role in undermining Byzantine authority in Anatolia and Armenia , and allowed for the gradual Turkification of Anatolia . 
 The brunt of the battle was borne by the professional soldiers from the eastern and western tagmata , as large numbers of mercenaries and Anatolian levies fled early and survived the battle . The fallout from Manzikert was disastrous for the Byzantines , resulting in civil conflicts and an economic crisis that severely weakened the Byzantine Empire 's ability to adequately defend its borders . This led to the mass movement of Turks into central Anatolia — by 1080 , an area of 78 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 30 @,@ 000 sq mi ) had been gained by the Seljuk Turks . It took three decades of internal strife before Alexius I ( 1081 to 1118 ) restored stability to Byzantium . Historian Thomas Asbridge says : " In 1071 , the Seljuqs crushed an imperial army at the Battle of Manzikert ( in eastern Asia Minor ) , and though historians no longer consider this to have been an utterly cataclysmic reversal for the Greeks , it still was a stinging setback . " It was the first time in history a Byzantine Emperor had become the prisoner of a Muslim commander . 
 = = Background = = 
 Although the Byzantine Empire had remained strong and powerful in the Middle Ages , it began to decline under the reign of the militarily incompetent Constantine IX and again under Constantine X — a brief two @-@ year period of reform under Isaac I merely delayed the decay of the Byzantine army . Under Constantine IX the Byzantines first came into contact with the Seljuk Turks when they attempted to annex Ani , the Armenian capital . Constantine made a truce with the Seljuks that lasted until 1064 , but they then took Ani , and in 1067 the rest of Armenia , followed by Caesarea . 
 In 1068 Romanos IV took power , and after some speedy military reforms entrusted Manuel Comnenus ( nephew of Isaac I Comnenus ) to lead an expedition against the Seljuks . Manuel captured Hierapolis <unk> in Syria , next thwarted a Turkish attack against Iconium with a counter @-@ attack , but was then defeated and captured by the Seljuks under the Sultan Alp Arslan . Despite his success Alp Arslan was quick to seek a peace treaty with the Byzantines , signed in 1069 ; he saw the Fatimids in Egypt as his main enemy and had no desire to be diverted by unnecessary hostilities . 
 In February 1071 , Romanos sent envoys to Alp Arslan to renew the 1069 treaty , and keen to secure his northern flank against attack , Alp Arslan happily agreed . Abandoning the siege of Edessa , he immediately led his army to attack Fatimid @-@ held Aleppo . However , the peace treaty had been a deliberate distraction : Romanos now led a large army into Armenia to recover the lost fortresses before the Seljuks had time to respond . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Accompanying Romanos was Andronicus Ducas , his co @-@ emperor and rival . The army consisted of about 5 @,@ 000 professional Byzantine troops from the western provinces and probably about the same number from the eastern provinces ; 500 Frankish and Norman mercenaries under Roussel de Bailleul ; some Turkic ( <unk> and Pecheneg ) and Bulgarian mercenaries ; infantry under the duke of Antioch ; a contingent of Georgian and Armenian troops ; and some ( but not all ) of the Varangian Guard , to total around 40 @,@ 000 to 70 @,@ 000 men . The quantity of the provincial troops had declined in the years prior to Romanos , as the government diverted funding to mercenaries who were judged less likely to be involved in politics and could be disbanded after use to save money . 
 The march across Asia Minor was long and difficult , and Romanos did not endear himself to his troops by bringing a luxurious baggage train along with him ; the local population also suffered some plundering by his Frankish mercenaries , whom he was obliged to dismiss . The expedition rested at Sebasteia on the river Halys , reaching Theodosiopolis in June 1071 . There , some of his generals suggested continuing the march into Seljuk territory and catching Alp Arslan before he was ready . Others , including Nicephorus <unk> , suggested they wait and fortify their position . It was decided to continue the march . 
 Thinking that Alp Arslan was either further away or not coming at all , Romanos marched towards Lake Van , expecting to retake Manzikert rather quickly , as well as the nearby fortress of Khliat if possible . Alp Arslan was already in the area , however , with allies and 30 @,@ 000 cavalry from Aleppo and Mosul . Alp Arslan 's scouts knew exactly where Romanos was , while Romanos was completely unaware of his opponent 's movements . 
 Romanos ordered his general Joseph Tarchaniotes to take some of the regular troops and the Varangians and accompany the Pechenegs and Franks to Khliat , while Romanos and the rest of the army marched to Manzikert . This split the forces in half , each taking about 20 @,@ 000 men . It is unknown what happened to the army sent off with Tarchaniotes — according to Islamic sources , Alp Arslan smashed this army , but Roman sources make no mention of any such encounter , whilst <unk> suggests that Tarchaniotes fled at the sight of the Seljuk Sultan — an unlikely event considering the reputation of the Roman general . Either way , Romanos ' army was reduced to less than half his planned 40 @,@ 000 to 70 @,@ 000 men . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Alp Arslan summoned his army and delivered a speech by appearing in a white robe , as in an Islamic funeral shroud , in the morning of the battle . This was an encouraging message that he was ready to die in battle . Romanos was unaware of the loss of Tarchaneiotes and continued to Manzikert , which he easily captured on August 23 ; the Seljuks responded with heavy incursions by bowmen . The next day some foraging parties under Bryennios discovered the Seljuk army and were forced to retreat back to Manzikert . The Armenian general Basilakes was sent out with some cavalry , as Romanos did not believe this was Alp Arslan 's full army ; the cavalry was destroyed and Basilakes taken prisoner . Romanos drew up his troops into formation and sent the left wing out under Bryennios , who was almost surrounded by the quickly approaching Turks and was forced to retreat once more . The Seljuk forces hid among the nearby hills for the night , making it nearly impossible for Romanos to counterattack . 
 On August 25 , some of Romanos ' Turkic mercenaries came into contact with their Seljuk kin and deserted . Romanos then rejected a Seljuk peace embassy . He wanted to settle the eastern question and the persistent Turkic incursions and settlements with a decisive military victory , and he understood that raising another army would be both difficult and expensive . The Emperor attempted to recall Tarchaneiotes , who was no longer in the area . There were no engagements that day , but on August 26 the Byzantine army gathered itself into a proper battle formation and began to march on the Turkish positions , with the left wing under Bryennios , the right wing under Theodore <unk> , and the centre under the emperor . At that moment , a Turkish soldier said to Alp Arslan , " My Sultan , the enemy army is approaching " , and Alp Arslan is said to have replied , " Then we are also approaching them " . Andronikos Doukas led the reserve forces in the rear — a foolish mistake , considering the loyalties of the <unk> . The Seljuks were organized into a crescent formation about four kilometres away . Seljuk archers attacked the Byzantines as they drew closer ; the centre of their crescent continually moved backwards while the wings moved to surround the Byzantine troops . 
 The Byzantines held off the arrow attacks and captured Alp Arslan 's camp by the end of the afternoon . However , the right and left wings , where the arrows did most of their damage , almost broke up when individual units tried to force the Seljuks into a pitched battle ; the Seljuk cavalry simply disengaged when challenged , the classic hit and run tactics of steppe warriors . With the Seljuks avoiding battle , Romanos was forced to order a withdrawal by the time night fell . However , the right wing misunderstood the order , and Doukas , as a rival of Romanos , deliberately ignored the emperor and marched back to the camp outside Manzikert , rather than covering the emperor 's retreat . With the Byzantines thoroughly confused , the Seljuks seized the opportunity and attacked . The Byzantine right wing was almost immediately routed , thinking they were betrayed either by the Armenians or the army 's Turkish auxiliaries . In fact the Armenians were the first to flee and they all managed to get away , while by contrast the Turkish auxiliaries remained loyal to the end . Other sources suggest that Armenian infantry were stoutly resisting and not turning tail and did not abandon the emperor as many had . When Romanos saw the boldness of Armenian foot soldiers , he displayed great affection for them and promised them unheard of rewards . In the end , the emperor 's personal troops and these Armenian foot soldiers suffered the most numerous casualties in the Byzantine army . The left wing under Bryennios held out a little longer but was also soon routed . The remnants of the Byzantine centre , including the Emperor and the Varangian Guard , were encircled by the Seljuks . Romanos was injured and taken prisoner by the Seljuks . The survivors were the many who fled the field and were pursued throughout the night , but not beyond that ; by dawn , the professional core of the Byzantine army had been destroyed whilst many of the peasant troops and levies who had been under the command of Andronikus had fled . 
 = = = Captivity of Romanos Diogenes = = = 
 When Emperor Romanos IV was conducted into the presence of Alp Arslan , the Sultan refused to believe that the bloodied and tattered man covered in dirt was the mighty Emperor of the Romans . After discovering his identity , Alp Arslan placed his boot on the Emperor 's neck and forced him to kiss the ground . A famous conversation is also reported to have taken place : 
 Alp Arslan : " What would you do if I were brought before you as a prisoner ? " 
 Romanos : " Perhaps I 'd kill you , or exhibit you in the streets of Constantinople . " 
 Alp Arslan : " My punishment is far heavier . I forgive you , and set you free . " 
 Alp Arslan treated Romanos with considerable kindness and again offered the terms of peace that he had offered prior to the battle . 
 According to Ibn al @-@ Adim , in the presence of Arslan , Romanos blamed the raids of Rashid al @-@ Dawla Mahmud into Byzantine territory for his interventions in Muslim territories which eventually led to the Battle of Manzikert . Romanos remained a captive of the Sultan for a week . During this time , the Sultan allowed Romanos to eat at his table whilst concessions were agreed upon : Antioch , Edessa , Hierapolis , and Manzikert were to be surrendered . This would have left the vital core of Anatolia untouched . A payment of 10 million gold pieces demanded by the Sultan as a ransom for Romanos was deemed as too high by the latter , so the Sultan reduced its short @-@ term expense by asking for 1 @.@ 5 million gold pieces as an initial payment instead , followed by an annual sum of 360 @,@ 000 gold pieces . Plus , a marriage alliance was prepared between Alp Arslan 's son and Romanos ’ daughter . The Sultan then gave Romanos many presents and an escort of two emirs and one hundred Mamluks on his route to Constantinople . 
 Shortly after his return to his subjects , Romanos found his rule in serious trouble . Despite attempts to raise loyal troops , he was defeated three times in battle against the Doukas family and was deposed , blinded , and exiled to the island of <unk> . He died soon after as a result of an infection caused by an injury during his brutal blinding . Romanos ' final foray into the Anatolian heartland , which he had worked so hard to defend , was a public humiliation . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 While Manzikert was a long @-@ term strategic catastrophe for Byzantium , it was by no means the massacre that historians earlier presumed . Modern scholars estimate that Byzantine losses were relatively low , considering that many units survived the battle intact and were fighting elsewhere within a few months , and most Byzantine prisoners of war were later released . Certainly , all the commanders on the Byzantine side ( Doukas , Tarchaneiotes , Bryennios , de Bailleul , and , above all , the Emperor ) survived and took part in later events . The battle did not directly change the balance of power between the Byzantines and the Seljuks , however the ensuing civil war within the Byzantine Empire did , to the advantage of Seljuks . 
 Doukas had escaped with no casualties and quickly marched back to Constantinople , where he led a coup against Romanos and proclaimed Michael VII as basileus . Bryennios also lost a few men in the rout of his wing . The Seljuks did not pursue the fleeing Byzantines , nor did they recapture Manzikert itself at this point . The Byzantine army regrouped and marched to <unk> , where they were joined by Romanos when he was released a week later . The most serious loss materially seems to have been the emperor 's extravagant baggage train . 
 The result of this disastrous defeat was , in simplest terms , the loss of the Eastern Roman Empire 's Anatolian heartland . John Julius Norwich says in his trilogy on the Byzantine Empire that the defeat was " its death blow , though centuries remained before the remnant fell . The themes in Anatolia were literally the heart of the empire , and within decades after Manzikert , they were gone . " In his smaller book , A Short History of Byzantium , Norwich describes the battle as " the greatest disaster suffered by the Empire in its seven and a half centuries of existence " . Sir Steven Runciman , in his " History of the Crusades " , noted that " The Battle of Manzikert was the most decisive disaster in Byzantine history . The Byzantines themselves had no illusions about it . Again and again their historians refer to that dreadful day . " 
 Anna Komnene , writing a few decades after the actual battle , wrote : 
 ... the fortunes of the Roman Empire had sunk to their lowest ebb . For the armies of the East were dispersed in all directions , because the Turks had over @-@ spread , and gained command of , countries between the Euxine Sea [ Black Sea ] and the Hellespont , and the Aegean Sea and Syrian Seas [ Mediterranean Sea ] , and the various bays , especially those which wash Pamphylia , Cilicia , and empty themselves into the Egyptian Sea [ Mediterranean Sea ] . 
 Years and decades later , Manzikert came to be seen as a disaster for the Empire ; later sources therefore greatly exaggerate the numbers of troops and the number of casualties . Byzantine historians would often look back and lament the " disaster " of that day , pinpointing it as the moment the decline of the Empire began . It was not an immediate disaster , but the defeat showed the Seljuks that the Byzantines were not invincible — they were not the unconquerable , millennium @-@ old Roman Empire ( as both the Byzantines and Seljuks still called it ) . The usurpation of Andronikos Doukas also politically destabilized the empire and it was difficult to organize resistance to the Turkish migrations that followed the battle . Despite the traditional view of historians that a wave of Turkish immigration ' overran ' Anatolia in the decades that followed , modern genetic studies show that even with additional centuries of Turkic immigration , the population of Anatolia today has only a small admixture of Central Asian heritage . The conquest of the Seljuk 's appears to be one of installing a new political elite . Finally , while intrigue and the deposition of Emperors had taken place before , the fate of Romanos was particularly horrific , and the destabilization caused by it also rippled through the empire for centuries . 
 What followed the battle was a chain of events — of which the battle was the first link — that undermined the Empire in the years to come . They included intrigues for the throne , the fate of Romanos , and Roussel de Bailleul attempting to carve himself an independent kingdom in Galatia with his 3 @,@ 000 Frankish , Norman , and German mercenaries . He defeated the Emperor 's uncle John Doukas , who had come to suppress him , advancing toward the capital to destroy Chrysopolis ( Üsküdar ) on the Asian coast of the Bosphorus . The Empire finally turned to the spreading Seljuks to crush de Bailleul ( which they did ) . However the Turks ransomed him back to his wife , and it was not before the young general Alexios Komnenos pursued him that he was captured . These events all interacted to create a vacuum that the Turks filled . Their choice in establishing their capital in <unk> ( <unk> ) in 1077 could possibly be explained by a desire to see if the Empire 's struggles could present new opportunities . 
 In hindsight , both Byzantine and contemporary historians are unanimous in dating the decline of Byzantine fortunes to this battle . As Paul K. Davis writes , " Byzantine defeat severely limited the power of the Byzantines by denying them control over Anatolia , the major recruiting ground for soldiers . Henceforth , the Muslims controlled the region . The Byzantine Empire was limited to the area immediately around Constantinople , and the Byzantines were never again a serious military force . " It is also interpreted as one of the root causes for the later Crusades , in that the First Crusade of 1095 was originally a western response to the Byzantine emperor 's call for military assistance after the loss of Anatolia . From another perspective , the West saw Manzikert as a signal that Byzantium was no longer capable of being the protector of Eastern Christianity or of Christian pilgrims to the Holy Places in the Middle East . Delbrück considers the importance of the battle to be exaggerated , but the evidence makes clear that it resulted in the Empire being unable to put an effective army into the field for many years to come . 
 The Battle of Myriokephalon , also known as the <unk> , has been compared to the Battle of Manzikert as a pivotal point in the decline of the Byzantine Empire . In both battles , separated by over a hundred years , an expansive Byzantine army was ambushed by a more elusive Seljuk opponent . The implications of <unk> were initially limited , however , thanks to Manuel I Komnenos holding on to power . The same could not be said of Romanos , whose enemies " martyred a courageous and upright man " , and as a result " the Empire ... would never recover " . 
 = Conwy town walls = 
 Conwy 's town walls are a medieval defensive structure around the town of Conwy in North Wales . The walls were constructed between 1283 and 1287 after the foundation of Conwy by Edward I , and were designed to form an integrated system of defence alongside Conwy Castle . The walls are 1 @.@ 3 km ( 0 @.@ 81 mi ) long and include 21 towers and three gatehouses . The project was completed using large quantities of labourers brought in from England ; the cost of building the castle and walls together came to around £ 15 @,@ 000 , a huge sum for the period . The walls were slightly damaged during the rebellion of Owain Glyndŵr in 1401 , but political changes in the 16th century reduced the need to maintain such defences around the town . The fortifications were treated sympathetically during the development of the road and railway systems in Conwy during the 19th century and survived largely intact into the modern period . Today the walls form part of the UNESCO world heritage site administered by Cadw . Historians Oliver Creighton and Robert Higham describe the defences as " one of the most impressive walled circuits " in Europe . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 13th century = = = 
 Before the English construction of the town of Conwy , the site was occupied by Aberconwy Abbey , a Cistercian monastery favoured by the Welsh princes . The site also controlled an important crossing point over the river Conwy between the coastal and inland areas of North Wales , and was defended for many years by Deganwy Castle . The English kings and Welsh princes had vied for control of the region since the 1070s and the conflict had been renewed during the 13th century , leading to Edward I intervening in North Wales for the second time during his reign in 1282 . Edward invaded with a huge army , pushing north from Carmarthen and westwards from Montgomery and Chester . Edward captured Aberconwy in March 1283 and decided that the location would form the centre of a new county : the abbey would be relocated eight miles inland and a new English castle and walled town would be built on the monastery 's former site . The ruined castle of Deganwy was abandoned and never rebuilt . Edward 's plan was a colonial enterprise and placing the new town and walls on top of such a high @-@ status native Welsh site was in part a symbolic act to demonstrate English power . 
 Traditionally Conwy 's design and defences have been thought to have been inspired by the growth of the bastides . The bastides were new planned towns created in both France and English @-@ held Gascony during the period , characterised by grids of straight streets , often defended by combinations of castles and town walls . More recent research , however , has shown that English town design played a more significant role in shaping Conwy and other Edwardian town plans . Analysis of the new towns in Wales and England of the period has identified common similarities in their design , with most featuring a " T " -shaped street plan stretching away from the coast or river , aligned with a castle that is usually positioned at a top corner of the " T " . The street plan of Conwy forms a mirror image of Beaumaris , for example , although ditches and palisades protected Beaumaris rather than a stone wall . 
 The walls of Conwy were built at around the same time as the castle itself , under the overall supervision of Master James of Saint George , Edward 's chief architect in North Wales . Each summer huge numbers of labourers were mobilised from across England , massed at Chester , and then brought into Wales for the building season . The first phase of work on the walls in 1283 involved digging ditches and erecting a palisade around the future town to secure the area in order to allow further work to commence . The stone walls and towers were then constructed in three phases . Between 1284 and 1285 , Richard the Engineer , Master James ' second in command in North Wales , built the western side of the walls ; this was the most vulnerable side of the town and was deliberately given priority . In 1286 , John Francis , a Savoyard mason , finished the south wall and in 1287 the remainder of the walls along the eastern quayside were completed under the supervision of Philip of Darley . Edward 's accountants did not separate the costs of the town walls from that of the castle , and the total cost of the two projects came to around £ 15 @,@ 000 , a huge sum for the period . 
 = = = 14th – 18th centuries = = = 
 The new town of Conwy was populated by English settlers , particularly from nearby Cheshire and Lancashire , and the town walls were in part designed to encourage immigrants to settle there in safety . The town of Conwy was only modestly successful , however ; by 1312 it had 124 burgage tenements – properties paying rent to the king – making it more successful than neighbouring Caernarfon , but less so than Beaumaris . Welsh residents appear to have slowly arrived inside the town during the 14th century , and even then were subject to considerable suspicion . Protecting the town remained a priority and during this period the constable charged with the security of the castle was also the mayor of Conwy , although protecting the town walls was probably the duty of the citizens rather than the forces attached to the castle . The walls were guarded by crossbowmen , and improved firing positions for them were built into the town walls at the start of the 14th century . 
 In 1400 the Welsh prince Owain Glyndŵr rose in rebellion against English rule . Two of Owain 's cousins infiltrated and took control of Conwy Castle in 1401 and , despite the defensive walls , the town of Conwy was occupied for two months and sacked by Welsh forces . The townspeople complained that £ 5 @,@ 000 worth of damage had been done , including the destruction of the gates and the bridges along the town walls . 
 Over a century later , there are records of the walls being repaired in the 1520s and 1530s by Henry VIII in preparation for a potential royal visit , but the ascension of the Tudor dynasty to the English throne had heralded a change in the way Wales was administered . The Tudors were Welsh in origin , and their rule eased hostilities between the Welsh and English . The military importance of Conwy 's defences declined and the townspeople used the walls ' defensive ditches for discarding rubbish . Parts of the town walls were robbed for their stone during this period for use in the construction of local buildings . 
 = = = 19th – 21st centuries = = = 
 During the 19th century some changes to Conwy 's town walls were made in order to accommodate a new railway line and roads . The engineer Thomas Telford built two new gateways into the walls in 1826 to accommodate the traffic from the new suspension bridge across the river Conwy . In 1848 Robert Stephenson constructed the Chester to Holyhead railway line , which ran through Conwy ; unusually for the period , attempts were made to sensitively protect the appearance of the medieval fortifications and the entrance for the railway through the walls on the south side of the town was built in the form of a mock @-@ Gothic archway , while an exit tunnel was dug under the western walls . 
 Interest in the town walls grew and in the 19th century one of the towers was restored and part of the wall @-@ walk opened up for tourists . The walls were architecturally surveyed for the first time between 1928 and 1930 , with the results published in 1938 . The town walls were leased from Conwy 's local authority by the Ministry of Works in 1953 , and a concerted effort began to conserve and protect the fortifications . Many of the houses and buildings which had grown up against the walls since the 14th century were removed in an effort to improve the appearance of the walled circuit and to assist in conservation and archaeological work , and one of the 19th @-@ century gateways inserted by Telford was demolished in 1958 . Arnold J. Taylor , a prominent historian of the Edwardian castles , conducted extensive academic work on the history and architecture of Conwy 's walls during the 1950s and 1960s , adding to their prominence . 
 Today Conwy 's walls are managed by the Welsh heritage organisation Cadw as a tourist attraction ; they form a popular walk around the town , although not all of the walls are safe for tourists to use . The walls require ongoing maintenance ; in the financial year between 2002 and 2003 , for example , this cost £ 145 @,@ 000 ( £ 184 @,@ 000 in 2010 terms ) . The walls were declared part of a UNESCO world heritage site in 1986 and are classed as a grade 1 listed building and hold scheduled monument status . They are considered by historians Oliver Creighton and Robert Higham to be " one of the most impressive walled circuits " in Europe . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Conwy town walls today present a largely unbroken , 1 @.@ 3 km ( 0 @.@ 81 mi ) long triangular circuit around the town , enclosing 10 hectares ( 25 acres ) , and – thanks in part to Conwy remaining a relatively small town – are unusually well preserved . They are mostly built from the same local sand- and limestone used at the castle , but with additional rhyolite stone used along the upper parts of the eastern walls . When first built , the historical record shows that the walls were " daubed " – it unclear precisely what this involved , but it implies the walls were not simply bare stone , and were possibly whitewashed . The 21 surviving towers are mostly " gap @-@ backed " , lacking walls on the inside of the towers , and originally included removable wooden bridges to allow sections of the walls to be sealed off from attackers . The tops of the walls feature an unusual design that uses a sequence of corbels to provide a flat , relatively wide wall @-@ walk . 
 The east side of the walls emerge from Conwy Castle , but are gapped where the Chester to Holyhead road enters the town . The east side has four towers , with a postern gate and the Lower Gate both giving access to the town 's quay ; all of these features have been substantially altered from their original medieval appearances . The Lower Gate , equipped with twin towers and a portcullis , controlled access to both the quayside and , prior to the construction of the bridge , the ferry across the estuary . The wall here was originally only 3 @.@ 6 m ( 12 ft ) high in places , and was later raised to its current height using rhyolite stone in the early 14th century . 
 The west side of the walls include nine towers , rising upwards towards the south @-@ west corner . Two of the towers were significantly affected by 19th @-@ century developments ; one was converted into an entrance way for the Bangor Road in 1827 , whilst another suffered a deep fissure caused by subsidence from the excavation of the Chester to Holyhead railway tunnel in 1845 , and had to be underpinned in 1963 . One of the remaining merlons on this stretch of the walls ' battlements has a stone finial on top , a design originally used along all of the town walls . The western wall originally extended out to the river Conwy itself , ending in a round tower , but this has since been lost ; a similar spur arrangement was seen at Chester and Lincoln . 
 The walls stretch along the south of the town with eight towers and two gatehouses . The Upper Gate formed the main inland entrance to the town during the medieval period , and , in addition to its twin towers , was originally protected by a stone barbican , of which some stonework still remains – a rare survival for town barbicans of this period . A gatekeeper would have lived over the entrance during the medieval period . The original defensive ditch and drawbridge have been filled in , however , and replaced by a modern road . The second gatehouse , Mill Gate , was designed to allow access to the royal watermill that lay just outside the main town , and similarly features twin protective towers . In between the two gatehouses are the remains of Llywelyn 's Hall , a grand building originally built into the town walls by Edward I before being dismantled and moved to Caernarfon Castle in 1316 . Further along the walls is the mock @-@ Gothic archway built in 1846 to accommodate the local railway , possibly drawing on similar designs used in Chester . A unique set of twelve medieval latrines is built into the southern town walls , first constructed for the use of royal staff working in adjacent buildings in the 13th century . 
 = William Tecumseh Sherman = 
 William Tecumseh Sherman / <unk> / ( February 8 , 1820 – February 14 , 1891 ) was an American soldier , businessman , educator and author . He served as a General in the Union Army during the American Civil War ( 1861 – 65 ) , for which he received recognition for his outstanding command of military strategy as well as criticism for the harshness of the " scorched earth " policies that he implemented in conducting total war against the Confederate States . 
 Sherman began his Civil War career serving in the First Battle of Bull Run and Kentucky in 1861 . He served under General Ulysses S. Grant in 1862 and 1863 during the battles of Forts Henry and Donelson , the Battle of Shiloh , the campaigns that led to the fall of the Confederate stronghold of Vicksburg on the Mississippi River , and the Chattanooga Campaign , which culminated with the routing of the Confederate armies in the state of Tennessee . In 1864 , Sherman succeeded Grant as the Union commander in the Western Theater of the war . He proceeded to lead his troops to the capture of the city of Atlanta , a military success that contributed to the re @-@ election of U.S. President Abraham Lincoln . Sherman 's subsequent march through Georgia and the Carolinas further undermined the Confederacy 's ability to continue fighting . He accepted the surrender of all the Confederate armies in the Carolinas , Georgia , and Florida in April 1865 , after having been present at most major military engagements in the Western Theater . 
 When Grant assumed the U.S. presidency in 1869 , Sherman succeeded him as Commanding General of the Army , in which capacity he served from 1869 until 1883 . As such , he was responsible for the U.S. Army 's engagement in the Indian Wars over the next 15 years , in the western United States . He steadfastly refused to be drawn into politics and in 1875 published his Memoirs , one of the best @-@ known first @-@ hand accounts of the Civil War . British military historian B. H. Liddell Hart famously declared that Sherman was " the first modern general " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sherman was born in 1820 in Lancaster , Ohio , near the banks of the Hocking River . His father Charles Robert Sherman , a successful lawyer who sat on the Ohio Supreme Court , died unexpectedly in 1829 . He left his widow , Mary Hoyt Sherman , with eleven children and no inheritance . After his father 's death , the nine @-@ year @-@ old Sherman was raised by a Lancaster neighbor and family friend , attorney Thomas Ewing , Sr. , a prominent member of the Whig Party who served as senator from Ohio and as the first Secretary of the Interior . Sherman was distantly related to American founding father Roger Sherman and grew to admire him . 
 Sherman 's older brother Charles Taylor Sherman became a federal judge . One of his younger brothers , John Sherman , served as a U.S. senator and Cabinet secretary . Another younger brother , Hoyt Sherman , was a successful banker . Two of his foster brothers served as major generals in the Union Army during the Civil War : Hugh Boyle Ewing , later an ambassador and author , and Thomas Ewing , Jr . , who would serve as defense attorney in the military trials of the Lincoln conspirators . Sherman would marry his foster sister , Ellen Boyle Ewing , at age 30 and have eight children with her . 
 = = = Sherman 's given names = = = 
 Sherman 's unusual given name has always attracted considerable attention . Sherman reported that his middle name came from his father having " caught a fancy for the great chief of the Shawnees , ' Tecumseh . ' " Since an account in a 1932 biography about Sherman , it has often been reported that , as an infant , Sherman was named simply Tecumseh . According to these accounts , Sherman only acquired the name " William " at age nine or ten , after being taken into the Ewing household . His foster mother , Maria Willis Boyle ( Maria Ewing ) , was of Irish ancestry and a devout Roman Catholic . Sherman was raised in a Roman Catholic household , though he later left the church , citing the effect of the Civil War on his religious views . According to a story that may be myth , Sherman was baptized in the Ewing home by a Dominican priest , who named him William for the saint 's day : possibly June 25 , the feast day of Saint William of Montevergine . The story is contested , however . Sherman wrote in his Memoirs that his father named him William Tecumseh ; Sherman was baptized by a Presbyterian minister as an infant and given the name William at that time . As an adult , Sherman signed all his correspondence – including to his wife – " W.T. Sherman . " His friends and family always called him " <unk> . " 
 = = = Military training and service = = = 
 Senator Ewing secured an appointment for the 16 @-@ year @-@ old Sherman as a cadet in the United States Military Academy at West Point , where he roomed and became good friends with another important future Civil War General , George H. Thomas . There Sherman excelled academically , but he treated the demerit system with indifference . Fellow cadet William Rosecrans would later remember Sherman at West Point as " one of the brightest and most popular fellows " and " a bright @-@ eyed , red @-@ headed fellow , who was always prepared for a lark of any kind . " About his time at West Point , Sherman says only the following in his Memoirs : 
 At the Academy I was not considered a good soldier , for at no time was I selected for any office , but remained a private throughout the whole four years . Then , as now , neatness in dress and form , with a strict conformity to the rules , were the qualifications required for office , and I suppose I was found not to excel in any of these . In studies I always held a respectable reputation with the professors , and generally ranked among the best , especially in drawing , chemistry , mathematics , and natural philosophy . My average demerits , per annum , were about one hundred and fifty , which reduced my final class standing from number four to six . 
 Upon graduation in 1840 , Sherman entered the Army as a second lieutenant in the 3rd U.S. Artillery and saw action in Florida in the Second Seminole War against the Seminole tribe . He was later stationed in Georgia and South Carolina . As the foster son of a prominent Whig politician , in Charleston , the popular Lt. Sherman moved within the upper circles of Old South society . 
 While many of his colleagues saw action in the Mexican – American War , Sherman performed administrative duties in the captured territory of California . Along with fellow Lieutenants Henry Halleck and Edward Ord , Sherman embarked from New York on the 198 @-@ day journey around Cape Horn aboard the converted sloop USS Lexington . Due to the confined spaces aboard @-@ ship , Sherman grew close to Halleck and Ord , and in his Memoirs references a hike with Halleck to the summit of Corcovado , notable as the future spot of the Cristo <unk> statue . Sherman and Ord reached the town of Yerba Buena , in California , two days before its name was changed to San Francisco . In 1848 , Sherman accompanied the military governor of California , Col. Richard Barnes Mason , in the inspection that officially confirmed that gold had been discovered in the region , thus inaugurating the California Gold Rush . Sherman , along with Ord , assisted in surveys for the sub @-@ divisions of the town that would become Sacramento . 
 Sherman earned a brevet promotion to captain for his " meritorious service " , but his lack of a combat assignment discouraged him and may have contributed to his decision to resign his commission . He would eventually become one of the few high @-@ ranking officers during the Civil War who had not fought in Mexico . 
 = = = Marriage and business career = = = 
 In 1850 , Sherman was promoted to the substantive rank of Captain and married his foster sister , Ellen Boyle Ewing , four years younger , in a Washington ceremony attended by President Zachary Taylor and other political luminaries . Thomas Ewing was serving as the Secretary of the Interior at the time . 
 Like her mother , Ellen Ewing Sherman was a devout Roman Catholic , and the Shermans ' eight children were reared in that faith . In 1864 , Ellen took up temporary residence in South Bend , Indiana , to have her young family educated at the University of Notre Dame and St. Mary 's College . In 1874 , with Sherman having become world famous , their eldest child , Marie Ewing ( " Minnie " ) Sherman , also had a politically prominent wedding , attended by President Ulysses S. Grant and commemorated by a generous gift from the Khedive of Egypt . ( Eventually , one of Minnie 's daughters married a grandson of Confederate general Lewis Addison Armistead . ) Another of the Sherman daughters , Eleanor , was married to Alexander Montgomery <unk> at General Sherman 's home in Washington , D.C. , on May 5 , 1880 . To Sherman 's great displeasure and sorrow , his oldest surviving son , Thomas Ewing Sherman , joined the religious order of the Jesuits in 1878 and was ordained as a priest in 1889 . 
 In 1853 , Sherman resigned his captaincy and became manager of the San Francisco branch of the St. Louis @-@ based bank , Lucas , Turner & Co . He returned to San Francisco at a time of great turmoil in the West . He survived two shipwrecks and floated through the Golden Gate on the overturned hull of a foundering lumber schooner . Sherman suffered from stress @-@ related asthma because of the city 's aggressive business culture . Late in life , regarding his time in a San Francisco experiencing a frenzy of real estate speculation , Sherman recalled : " I can handle a hundred thousand men in battle , and take the City of the Sun , but am afraid to manage a lot in the swamp of San Francisco . " In 1856 , during the vigilante period , he served briefly as a major general of the California militia . 
 Sherman 's San Francisco branch closed in May 1857 , and he relocated to New York on behalf of the same bank . When the bank failed during the financial Panic of 1857 , he closed the New York branch . In early 1858 , he returned to California to wrap @-@ up the bank 's affairs there . Later in 1858 , he moved to Leavenworth , Kansas , where he tried his hand at law practice and other ventures without much success . 
 = = = Military college superintendent = = = 
 In 1859 , Sherman accepted a job as the first superintendent of the Louisiana State Seminary of Learning & Military Academy in Pineville , a position he sought at the suggestion of Major D. C. Buell and secured because of General George Mason Graham . He proved an effective and popular leader of the institution , which later became Louisiana State University ( LSU ) . Colonel Joseph P. Taylor , the brother of the late President Zachary Taylor , declared that " if you had hunted the whole army , from one end of it to the other , you could not have found a man in it more admirably suited for the position in every respect than Sherman . " 
 Although his brother John was well known as an antislavery congressman , Sherman did not oppose slavery and was sympathetic to Southerners ' defense of the institution . He opposed , however , any attempt at dissolving the Union . On hearing of South Carolina 's secession from the United States , Sherman observed to a close friend , Professor David F. Boyd of Virginia , an enthusiastic secessionist : 
 You people of the South don 't know what you are doing . This country will be drenched in blood , and God only knows how it will end . It is all folly , madness , a crime against civilization ! You people speak so lightly of war ; you don 't know what you 're talking about . War is a terrible thing ! You mistake , too , the people of the North . They are a peaceable people but an earnest people , and they will fight , too . They are not going to let this country be destroyed without a mighty effort to save it ... Besides , where are your men and appliances of war to contend against them ? The North can make a steam engine , locomotive , or railway car ; hardly a yard of cloth or pair of shoes can you make . You are rushing into war with one of the most powerful , ingeniously mechanical , and determined people on Earth — right at your doors . You are bound to fail . Only in your spirit and determination are you prepared for war . In all else you are totally unprepared , with a bad cause to start with . At first you will make headway , but as your limited resources begin to fail , shut out from the markets of Europe as you will be , your cause will begin to wane . If your people will but stop and think , they must see in the end that you will surely fail . 
 He thus very accurately described the four years of war to come . 
 In January 1861 , as more Southern states were seceding from the Union , Sherman was required to accept receipt of arms surrendered to the State Militia by the U.S. Arsenal at Baton Rouge , Louisiana . Instead of complying , he resigned his position as superintendent and returned to the North , declaring to the governor of Louisiana , " On no earthly account will I do any act or think any thought hostile ... to the ... United States . " 
 = = = St. Louis interlude = = = 
 Immediately following his departure from Louisiana , Sherman traveled to Washington , D.C. , possibly in the hope of securing a position in the army , and met with Abraham Lincoln in the White House during inauguration week . Sherman expressed concern about the North 's poor state of preparedness but found Lincoln unresponsive . 
 Thereafter , Sherman became president of the St. Louis Railroad , a streetcar company , a position he would hold for only a few months . Thus , he was living in border @-@ state Missouri as the secession crisis came to a climax . While trying to hold himself aloof from controversy , he observed firsthand the efforts of Congressman Frank Blair , who later served under Sherman , to hold Missouri in the Union . In early April , he declined an offer from the Lincoln administration to take a position in the War Department as a prelude to his becoming Assistant Secretary of War . After the bombardment of Fort Sumter , Sherman hesitated about committing to military service and ridiculed Lincoln 's call for 75 @,@ 000 three @-@ month volunteers to quell secession , reportedly saying : " Why , you might as well attempt to put out the flames of a burning house with a squirt @-@ gun . " However , in May , he offered himself for service in the regular army , and his brother ( Senator John Sherman ) and other connections maneuvered to get him a commission in the regular army . On June 3 , he wrote that " I still think it is to be a long war – very long – much longer than any Politician thinks . " He received a telegram summoning him to Washington on June 7 . 
 = = Civil War service = = 
 = = = First commissions and Bull Run = = = 
 Sherman was first commissioned as colonel of the 13th U.S. Infantry Regiment , effective May 14 , 1861 . This was a new regiment yet to be raised , and Sherman 's first command was actually of a brigade of three @-@ month volunteers , at the head of which he became one of the few Union officers to distinguish himself at the First Battle of Bull Run on July 21 , 1861 , where he was grazed by bullets in the knee and shoulder . The disastrous Union defeat at Bull Run led Sherman to question his own judgment as an officer and the capacities of his volunteer troops . President Lincoln , however , was impressed by Sherman while visiting the troops on July 23 and promoted him to brigadier general of volunteers ( effective May 17 , 1861 , with seniority in rank to Ulysses S. Grant , his future commander ) . He was assigned to serve under Robert Anderson in the Department of the Cumberland in Louisville , Kentucky , and in October Sherman succeeded Anderson in command of the department . Sherman considered that his new assignment broke a promise from Lincoln that he would not be given such a prominent position . 
 = = = Breakdown = = = 
 Having succeeded Anderson at Louisville , Sherman now had principal military responsibility for Kentucky , a border state in which Confederate troops held Columbus and Bowling Green and were present near the Cumberland Gap . He became exceedingly pessimistic about the outlook for his command and he complained frequently to Washington , D.C. about shortages while providing exaggerated estimates of the strength of the rebel forces . Very critical press reports appeared about him after an October visit to Louisville by the Secretary of War , Simon Cameron , and in early November 1861 Sherman insisted that he be relieved . He was promptly replaced by Brigadier General Don Carlos Buell and transferred to St. Louis , Missouri . In December , he was put on leave by Maj. Gen. Henry W. Halleck , commander of the Department of the Missouri , who considered him unfit for duty . Sherman went to Lancaster , Ohio , to recuperate . While he was at home , his wife Ellen wrote to his brother , Senator John Sherman , seeking advice . She complained of " that melancholy insanity to which your family is subject . " Sherman later wrote that the concerns of command " broke me down " , and he admitted contemplating suicide . His problems were compounded when the Cincinnati Commercial described him as " insane . " 
 By mid @-@ December 1861 Sherman had recovered sufficiently to return to service under Halleck in the Department of the Missouri . ( In March , Halleck 's command was redesignated the Department of the Mississippi and enlarged to unify command in the West ) . Sherman 's initial assignments were rear @-@ echelon commands , first of an instructional barracks near St. Louis and then in command of the District of Cairo . Operating from Paducah , Kentucky , he provided logistical support for the operations of Brig. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant to capture Fort Donelson ( February 1862 ) . Grant , the previous commander of the District of Cairo , had recently won a major victory at Fort Henry ( February 6 , 1862 ) and been given command of the ill @-@ defined District of West Tennessee . Although Sherman was technically the senior officer at this time , he wrote to Grant , " I feel anxious about you as I know the great facilities [ the Confederates ] have of concentration by means of the River and R Road , but [ I ] have faith in you — Command me in any way . " 
 = = = Shiloh = = = 
 After Grant captured Fort Donelson , Sherman got his wish to serve under Grant when he was assigned on March 1 , 1862 , to the Army of West Tennessee as commander of the 5th Division . His first major test under Grant was at the Battle of Shiloh . The massive Confederate attack on the morning of April 6 , 1862 , took most of the senior Union commanders by surprise . Sherman had dismissed the intelligence reports received from militia officers , refusing to believe that Confederate General Albert Sidney Johnston would leave his base at Corinth . He took no precautions beyond strengthening his picket lines , and refused to entrench , build abatis , or push out reconnaissance patrols . At Shiloh , he may have wished to avoid appearing overly alarmed in order to escape the kind of criticism he had received in Kentucky . He had written to his wife that , if he took more precautions , " they 'd call me crazy again " . 
 Despite being caught unprepared by the attack , Sherman rallied his division and conducted an orderly , fighting retreat that helped avert a disastrous Union rout . Finding Grant at the end of the day sitting under an oak tree in the darkness and smoking a cigar , Sherman felt , in his words , " some wise and sudden instinct not to mention retreat " . In what would become one of the most notable conversations of the war , Sherman said simply : " Well , Grant , we 've had the devil 's own day , haven 't we ? " After a puff of his cigar , Grant replied calmly : " Yes . Lick ' em tomorrow , though . " Sherman proved instrumental to the successful Union counterattack of April 7 , 1862 . At Shiloh , Sherman was wounded twice — in the hand and shoulder — and had three horses shot out from under him . His performance was praised by Grant and Halleck and after the battle , and he was promoted to major general of volunteers , effective May 1 , 1862 . 
 Beginning in late April , a Union force of 100 @,@ 000 moved slowly against Corinth , under Halleck 's command with Grant relegated to second @-@ in @-@ command ; Sherman commanded the division on the extreme right of the Union 's right wing ( under George H. Thomas ) . Shortly after the Union forces occupied Corinth on May 30 , Sherman persuaded Grant not to leave his command , despite the serious difficulties he was having with Halleck . Sherman offered Grant an example from his own life , " Before the battle of Shiloh , I was cast down by a mere newspaper assertion of ' crazy ' , but that single battle gave me new life , and I 'm now in high feather . " He told Grant that , if he remained in the army , " some happy accident might restore you to favor and your true place . " In July , Grant 's situation improved when Halleck left for the East to become general @-@ in @-@ chief , and Sherman became the military governor of occupied Memphis . 
 = = = Vicksburg = = = 
 The careers of both officers ascended considerably after that time . In Sherman 's case , this was in part because he developed close personal ties to Grant during the two years they served together in the West . During the long and complicated campaign against Vicksburg , one newspaper complained that the " army was being ruined in mud @-@ turtle expeditions , under the leadership of a drunkard [ Grant ] , whose confidential adviser [ Sherman ] was a lunatic . " 
 Sherman 's military record in 1862 – 63 was mixed . In December 1862 , forces under his command suffered a severe repulse at the Battle of Chickasaw Bayou , just north of Vicksburg , Mississippi . Soon after , his XV Corps was ordered to join Maj. Gen. John A. McClernand in his successful assault on Arkansas Post , generally regarded as a politically motivated distraction from the effort to capture Vicksburg . Before the Vicksburg Campaign in the spring of 1863 , Sherman expressed serious reservations about the wisdom of Grant 's unorthodox strategy , but he went on to perform well in that campaign under Grant 's supervision . 
 The historian John D. Winters in The Civil War in Louisiana ( 1963 ) describes Sherman : 
 ... He had yet [ before Vicksburg ] to display any marked talents for leadership . Sherman , beset by hallucinations and unreasonable fears and finally contemplating suicide , had been relieved from command in Kentucky . He later began a new climb to success at Shiloh and Corinth under Grant . Still , if he muffed his Vicksburg assignment , which had begun unfavorably , he would rise no higher . As a man , Sherman was an eccentric mixture of strength and weakness . Although he was impatient , often irritable and depressed , petulant , headstrong , and unreasonably gruff , he had solid soldierly qualities . His men swore by him , and most of his fellow officers admired him . 
 = = = Chattanooga = = = 
 After the surrender of Vicksburg to the Union forces under Grant on July 4 , 1863 , Sherman was given the rank of brigadier general in the regular army , in addition to his rank as a major general of volunteers . Sherman 's family came from Ohio to visit his camp near Vicksburg ; his nine @-@ year @-@ old son , Willie , the Little Sergeant , died from typhoid fever contracted during the trip . 
 Command in the West was unified under Grant ( Military Division of the Mississippi ) , and Sherman succeeded Grant in command of the Army of the Tennessee . Following the defeat of the Army of the Cumberland at the Battle of Chickamauga by Confederate General Braxton Bragg 's Army of Tennessee , the army was besieged in Chattanooga , Tennessee . Sherman 's troops were sent to relieve them . While traveling to Chattanooga , Sherman departed Memphis on a train that arrived at the Battle of <unk> , Tenn . , while the Union garrison there was under attack on October 11 , 1863 . General Sherman took command of the 550 men and successfully defended against an attack of 3 @,@ 500 Confederate cavalry . 
 During the Chattanooga Campaign in November , under Grant 's overall command , Sherman quickly took his assigned target of Billy Goat Hill at the north end of Missionary Ridge , only to discover that it was not part of the ridge at all , but rather a detached spur separated from the main spine by a rock @-@ strewn ravine . When he attempted to attack the main spine at Tunnel Hill , his troops were repeatedly repulsed by Patrick Cleburne 's heavy division , the best unit in Bragg 's army . Sherman 's efforts were assisted by George Henry Thomas 's army 's successful assault on the center of the Confederate line , a movement originally intended as a diversion . Subsequently , Sherman led a column to relieve Union forces under Ambrose Burnside thought to be in peril at Knoxville . In February 1864 , he led an expedition to Meridian , Mississippi , to disrupt Confederate infrastructure . 
 = = = Atlanta = = = 
 Despite this mixed record , Sherman enjoyed Grant 's confidence and friendship . When Lincoln called Grant east in the spring of 1864 to take command of all the Union armies , Grant appointed Sherman ( by then known to his soldiers as " Uncle Billy " ) to succeed him as head of the Military Division of the Mississippi , which entailed command of Union troops in the Western Theater of the war . As Grant took overall command of the armies of the United States , Sherman wrote to him outlining his strategy to bring the war to an end concluding that " if you can whip Lee and I can march to the Atlantic I think ol ' Uncle Abe will give us twenty days leave to see the young folks . " 
 Sherman proceeded to invade the state of Georgia with three armies : the 60 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Army of the Cumberland under George Henry Thomas , the 25 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Army of the Tennessee under James B. McPherson , and the 13 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Army of the Ohio under John M. Schofield . He fought a lengthy campaign of maneuver through mountainous terrain against Confederate General Joseph E. Johnston 's Army of Tennessee , attempting a direct assault only at the disastrous Battle of Kennesaw Mountain . In July , the cautious Johnston was replaced by the more aggressive John Bell Hood , who played to Sherman 's strength by challenging him to direct battles on open ground . Meanwhile , in August , Sherman " learned that I had been commissioned a major @-@ general in the regular army , which was unexpected , and not desired until successful in the capture of Atlanta . " 
 Sherman 's Atlanta Campaign concluded successfully on September 2 , 1864 , with the capture of the city , which Hood had been forced to abandon . This success made Sherman a household name and helped ensure Lincoln 's presidential re @-@ election in November . In August , the Democratic Party had nominated as its candidate George B. McClellan , the popular former Union army commander , and it had seemed likely that Lincoln would lose to McClellan . Lincoln 's defeat could well have meant the victory of the Confederacy , as the Democratic Party platform called for peace negotiations based on the acknowledgment of the Confederacy 's independence . Thus the capture of Atlanta , coming when it did , may have been Sherman 's greatest contribution to the Union cause . 
 After ordering almost all civilians to leave the city in September , Sherman gave instructions that all military and government buildings in Atlanta be burned , although many private homes and shops were burned as well . This was to set a precedent for future behavior by his armies . 
 = = = March to the Sea = = = 
 During September and October , Sherman and Hood played cat @-@ and @-@ mouse in north Georgia ( and Alabama ) as Hood threatened Sherman 's communications to the north . Eventually , Sherman won approval from his superiors for a plan to cut loose from his communications and march south , having advised Grant that he could " make Georgia howl . " This created the threat that Hood would move north into Tennessee . <unk> that threat , Sherman reportedly said that he would " give [ Hood ] his rations " to go in that direction as " my business is down south . " However , Sherman left forces under Maj. Gens . George H. Thomas and John M. Schofield to deal with Hood ; their forces eventually smashed Hood 's army in the battles of Franklin ( November 30 ) and Nashville ( December 15 – 16 ) . Meanwhile , after the November elections , Sherman began a march with 62 @,@ 000 men to the port of Savannah , Georgia , living off the land and causing , by his own estimate , more than $ 100 million in property damage . Sherman called this harsh tactic of material war " hard war , " often seen as a species of total war . At the end of this campaign , known as Sherman 's March to the Sea , his troops captured Savannah on December 21 , 1864 . Sherman then dispatched a famous message to Lincoln , offering him the city as a Christmas present . 
 Sherman 's success in Georgia received ample coverage in the Northern press at a time when Grant seemed to be making little progress in his fight against Confederate General Robert E. Lee 's Army of Northern Virginia . A bill was introduced in Congress to promote Sherman to Grant 's rank of lieutenant general , probably with a view towards having him replace Grant as commander of the Union Army . Sherman wrote both to his brother , Senator John Sherman , and to General Grant vehemently repudiating any such promotion . According to a war @-@ time account , it was around this time that Sherman made his memorable declaration of loyalty to Grant : 
 General Grant is a great general . I know him well . He stood by me when I was crazy , and I stood by him when he was drunk ; and now , sir , we stand by each other always . 
 While in Savannah , Sherman learned from a newspaper that his infant son Charles Celestine had died during the Savannah Campaign ; the general had never seen the child . 
 = = = Final campaigns in the Carolinas = = = 
 Grant then ordered Sherman to embark his army on steamers and join the Union forces confronting Lee in Virginia , but Sherman instead persuaded Grant to allow him to march north through the Carolinas , destroying everything of military value along the way , as he had done in Georgia . He was particularly interested in targeting South Carolina , the first state to secede from the Union , because of the effect that it would have on Southern morale . His army proceeded north through South Carolina against light resistance from the troops of Confederate General Joseph E. Johnston . Upon hearing that Sherman 's men were advancing on corduroy roads through the <unk> swamps at a rate of a dozen miles per day , Johnston " made up his mind that there had been no such army in existence since the days of Julius Caesar . " 
 Sherman captured the state capital of Columbia , South Carolina , on February 17 , 1865 . Fires began that night and by next morning most of the central city was destroyed . The burning of Columbia has engendered controversy ever since , with some claiming the fires were accidental , others a deliberate act of vengeance , and still others that the retreating Confederates burned bales of cotton on their way out of town . 
 Local Native American Lumbee guides helped Sherman 's army cross the Lumber River , which was flooded by torrential rains , into North Carolina . According to Sherman , the trek across the Lumber River , and through the swamps , <unk> , and creeks of Robeson County was " the damnedest marching I ever saw . " Thereafter , his troops did little damage to the civilian infrastructure , as North Carolina , unlike its southern neighbor , was regarded by his men as a reluctant Confederate state , having been the last to secede from the Union . Sherman 's final significant military engagement was a victory over Johnston 's troops at the Battle of Bentonville , March 19 – 21 . He soon rendezvoused at Goldsborough , North Carolina , with Union troops awaiting him there after the capture of Fort Fisher and Wilmington . 
 In late March , Sherman briefly left his forces and traveled to City Point , Virginia , to consult with Grant . Lincoln happened to be at City Point at the same time , allowing the only three @-@ way meetings of Lincoln , Grant , and Sherman during the war . 
 = = = Confederate surrender = = = 
 Following Lee 's surrender to Grant at Appomattox Court House and the assassination of President Lincoln , Sherman met with Johnston at Bennett Place in Durham , North Carolina , to negotiate a Confederate surrender . At the insistence of Johnston and of Confederate President Jefferson Davis , Sherman conditionally agreed to generous terms that dealt with both political and military issues . Sherman thought that those terms were consistent with the views Lincoln had expressed at City Point , but the general had not been given the authority , by General Grant , the newly installed President Andrew Johnson , or the Cabinet , to offer those terms . 
 The government in Washington , D.C. , refused to approve Sherman 's terms and the Secretary of War , Edwin M. Stanton , denounced Sherman publicly , precipitating a long @-@ lasting feud between the two men . Confusion over this issue lasted until April 26 , 1865 , when Johnston , ignoring instructions from President Davis , agreed to purely military terms and formally surrendered his army and all the Confederate forces in the Carolinas , Georgia , and Florida , in what was the largest single capitulation of the war . Sherman proceeded with 60 @,@ 000 of his troops to Washington , D.C. , where they marched in the Grand Review of the Armies , on May 24 , 1865 , and were then disbanded . Having become the second most important general in the Union army , he thus had come full circle to the city where he started his war @-@ time service as colonel of a non @-@ existent infantry regiment . 
 = = Slavery and emancipation = = 
 Sherman was not an abolitionist before the war and , like others of his time and background , he did not believe in " Negro equality . " Before the war , Sherman at times even expressed some sympathy with the view of Southern whites that the black race was benefiting from slavery , although he opposed breaking up slave families and advocated teaching slaves to read and write . During the Civil War , Sherman declined to employ black troops in his armies . 
 Sherman 's military campaigns of 1864 and 1865 freed many slaves , who greeted him " as a second Moses or Aaron " and joined his marches through Georgia and the Carolinas by the tens of thousands . The fate of these refugees became a pressing military and political issue . Some abolitionists accused Sherman of doing little to alleviate the precarious living conditions of the freed slaves . To address this issue , on January 12 , 1865 , Sherman met in Savannah with Secretary of War Stanton and with twenty local black leaders . After Sherman 's departure , Garrison Frazier , a Baptist minister , declared in response to an inquiry about the feelings of the black community : 
 We looked upon General Sherman , prior to his arrival , as a man , in the providence of God , specially set apart to accomplish this work , and we unanimously felt inexpressible gratitude to him , looking upon him as a man that should be honored for the faithful performance of his duty . Some of us called upon him immediately upon his arrival , and it is probable he did not meet [ Secretary Stanton ] with more courtesy than he met us . His conduct and deportment toward us characterized him as a friend and a gentleman . 
 Four days later , Sherman issued his Special Field Orders , No. 15 . The orders provided for the settlement of 40 @,@ 000 freed slaves and black refugees on land expropriated from white landowners in South Carolina , Georgia , and Florida . Sherman appointed Brig. Gen. Rufus Saxton , an abolitionist from Massachusetts who had previously directed the recruitment of black soldiers , to implement that plan . Those orders , which became the basis of the claim that the Union government had promised freed slaves " 40 acres and a mule " , were revoked later that year by President Andrew Johnson . 
 Although the context is often overlooked , and the quotation usually chopped off , one of Sherman 's most famous statements about his hard @-@ war views arose in part from the racial attitudes summarized above . In his Memoirs , Sherman noted political pressures in 1864 – 1865 to encourage the escape of slaves , in part to avoid the possibility that " ' able @-@ bodied slaves will be called into the military service of the rebels . ' " Sherman thought concentration on such policies would have delayed the " successful end " of the war and the " <unk> [ ion of ] all slaves . " He went on to summarize vividly his hard @-@ war philosophy and to add , in effect , that he really did not want the help of liberated slaves in subduing the South : 
 My aim then was to whip the rebels , to humble their pride , to follow them to their inmost recesses , and make them fear and dread us . " Fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom . " I did not want them to cast in our teeth what General Hood had once done at Atlanta , that we had to call on their slaves to help us to subdue them . But , as regards kindness to the race ... , I assert that no army ever did more for that race than the one I commanded at Savannah . 
 = = Strategies = = 
 Sherman 's record as a tactician was mixed , and his military legacy rests primarily on his command of logistics and on his brilliance as a strategist . The influential 20th @-@ century British military historian and theorist B. H. Liddell Hart ranked Sherman as one of the most important strategists in the annals of war , along with Scipio Africanus , Belisarius , Napoleon Bonaparte , T. E. Lawrence , and Erwin Rommel . Liddell Hart credited Sherman with mastery of maneuver warfare ( also known as the " indirect approach " ) , as demonstrated by his series of turning movements against Johnston during the Atlanta Campaign . Liddell Hart also stated that study of Sherman 's campaigns had contributed significantly to his own " theory of strategy and tactics in mechanized warfare " , which had in turn influenced Heinz Guderian 's doctrine of Blitzkrieg and Rommel 's use of tanks during the Second World War . Another World War II @-@ era student of Liddell Hart 's writings about Sherman was George S. Patton , who " ' spent a long vacation studying Sherman 's campaigns on the ground in Georgia and the Carolinas , with the aid of [ Liddell Hart 's ] book ' " and later " ' carried out his [ bold ] plans , in super @-@ Sherman style ' " . 
 Sherman 's greatest contribution to the war , the strategy of total warfare — endorsed by General Grant and President Lincoln — has been the subject of controversy . Sherman himself downplayed his role in conducting total war , often saying that he was simply carrying out orders as best he could in order to fulfill his part of Grant 's master plan for ending the war . 
 = = = Total warfare = = = 
 Like Grant , Sherman was convinced that the Confederacy 's strategic , economic , and psychological ability to wage further war needed to be definitively crushed if the fighting were to end . Therefore , he believed that the North had to conduct its campaign as a war of conquest and employ scorched earth tactics to break the backbone of the rebellion . He called this strategy " hard war . " 
 Sherman 's advance through Georgia and South Carolina was characterized by widespread destruction of civilian supplies and infrastructure . Although looting was officially forbidden , historians disagree on how well this regulation was enforced . Union soldiers who foraged from Southern homes became known as <unk> . The speed and efficiency of the destruction by Sherman 's army was remarkable . The practice of heating rails and bending them around trees , leaving behind what came to be known as " Sherman 's neckties , " made repairs difficult . Accusations that civilians were targeted and war crimes were committed on the march have made Sherman a controversial figure to this day , particularly in the American South . 
 The damage done by Sherman was almost entirely limited to the destruction of property . Though exact figures are not available , the loss of civilian life appears to have been very small . Consuming supplies , wrecking infrastructure , and undermining morale were Sherman 's stated goals , and several of his Southern contemporaries noted this and commented on it . For instance , Alabama @-@ born Major Henry Hitchcock , who served in Sherman 's staff , declared that " it is a terrible thing to consume and destroy the sustenance of thousands of people , " but if the scorched earth strategy served " to paralyze their husbands and fathers who are fighting ... it is mercy in the end . " 
 The severity of the destructive acts by Union troops was significantly greater in South Carolina than in Georgia or North Carolina . This appears to have been a consequence of the animosity among both Union soldiers and officers to the state that they regarded as the " cockpit of secession . " One of the most serious accusations against Sherman was that he allowed his troops to burn the city of Columbia . In 1867 , Gen. O. O. Howard , commander of Sherman 's 15th Corps , reportedly said , " It is useless to deny that our troops burnt Columbia , for I saw them in the act . " However , Sherman himself stated that " [ i ] f I had made up my mind to burn Columbia I would have burnt it with no more feeling than I would a common prairie dog village ; but I did not do it ... " Sherman 's official report on the burning placed the blame on Confederate Lt. Gen. Wade Hampton III , who Sherman said had ordered the burning of cotton in the streets . In his memoirs , Sherman said , " In my official report of this conflagration I distinctly charged it to General Wade Hampton , and confess I did so pointedly to shake the faith of his people in him , for he was in my opinion a braggart and professed to be the special champion of South Carolina . " Historian James M. McPherson has concluded that : 
 The fullest and most dispassionate study of this controversy blames all parties in varying proportions — including the Confederate authorities for the disorder that characterized the evacuation of Columbia , leaving thousands of cotton bales on the streets ( some of them burning ) and huge quantities of liquor <unk> ... Sherman did not deliberately burn Columbia ; a majority of Union soldiers , including the general himself , worked through the night to put out the fires . 
 In this general connection , it is also noteworthy that Sherman and his subordinates ( particularly John A. Logan ) took steps to protect Raleigh , North Carolina , from acts of revenge after the assassination of President Lincoln . 
 = = = Modern assessment = = = 
 After the fall of Atlanta in 1864 , Sherman ordered the city 's evacuation . When the city council appealed to him to rescind that order , on the grounds that it would cause great hardship to women , children , the elderly , and others who bore no responsibility for the conduct of the war , Sherman sent a written response in which he sought to articulate his conviction that a lasting peace would be possible only if the Union were restored , and that he was therefore prepared to do all he could do to quash the rebellion : 
 You cannot qualify war in harsher terms than I will . War is cruelty , and you cannot refine it ; and those who brought war into our country deserve all the curses and <unk> a people can pour out . I know I had no hand in making this war , and I know I will make more sacrifices to @-@ day than any of you to secure peace . But you cannot have peace and a division of our country . If the United States submits to a division now , it will not stop , but will go on until we reap the fate of Mexico , which is eternal war [ ... ] I want peace , and believe it can only be reached through union and war , and I will ever conduct war with a view to perfect and early success . But , my dear <unk> , when peace does come , you may call on me for anything . Then will I share with you the last cracker , and watch with you to shield your homes and families against danger from every quarter . 
 Literary critic Edmund Wilson found in Sherman 's Memoirs a fascinating and disturbing account of an " appetite for warfare " that " grows as it feeds on the South " . Former U.S. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara refers equivocally to the statement that " war is cruelty and you cannot refine it " in both the book Wilson 's Ghost and in his interview for the film The Fog of War . 
 But when comparing Sherman 's scorched @-@ earth campaigns to the actions of the British Army during the Second Boer War ( 1899 – 1902 ) — another war in which civilians were targeted because of their central role in sustaining an armed resistance — South African historian Hermann <unk> declares that it " looks as if Sherman struck a better balance than the British commanders between severity and restraint in taking actions proportional to legitimate needs " . The admiration of scholars such as Victor Davis Hanson , B. H. Liddell Hart , Lloyd Lewis , and John F. <unk> for General Sherman owes much to what they see as an approach to the exigencies of modern armed conflict that was both effective and principled . 
 In May 1865 , after the major Confederate armies had surrendered , Sherman wrote in a personal letter : 
 I confess , without shame , I am sick and tired of fighting — its glory is all moonshine ; even success the most brilliant is over dead and mangled bodies , with the anguish and lamentations of distant families , appealing to me for sons , husbands and fathers ... tis only those who have never heard a shot , never heard the shriek and groans of the wounded and lacerated ... that cry aloud for more blood , more vengeance , more desolation . 
 = = Departmental commander and Reconstruction = = 
 In June 1865 , two months after Robert E. Lee 's surrender at Appomattox , General Sherman received his first postwar command , originally called the Military Division of the Mississippi , later the Military Division of the Missouri , which came to comprise the territory between the Mississippi River and the Rocky Mountains . Sherman 's efforts in that position were focused on protecting the main wagon roads , such as the Oregon , Bozeman and Santa Fe Trails . Tasked with guarding a vast territory with a limited force , Sherman was wary of the multitude of requests by territories and settlements for protection . 
 One of Sherman 's main concerns in postwar commands was to protect the construction and operation of the railroads from attack by hostile Indians . Sherman 's views on Indian matters were often strongly expressed . He regarded the railroads " as the most important element now in progress to facilitate the military interests of our Frontier . " Hence , in 1867 , he wrote to Grant that " we are not going to let a few thieving , ragged Indians check and stop the progress of [ the railroads ] . " After the 1866 Fetterman Massacre , Sherman wrote Grant that " we must act with vindictive earnestness against the Sioux , even to their extermination , men , women and children . " 
 Despite this language , there was little large @-@ scale military action taken against the Indians during the first three years of Sherman 's tenure , as Sherman was willing to let the process of negotiations play out in order to buy time to procure more troops and allow the completion of the Union Pacific and Kansas Pacific Railroads . During his time as departmental commander , Sherman was a member of the Indian Peace Commission . Though the commission was responsible for the negotiation of the Medicine Lodge Treaty and the Sioux Treaty of 1868 , Sherman was not particularly privy in either due to being called away to Washington during the negotiations of both . In one such instance , he was called to testify in the impeachment trial of Andrew Johnson . However , Sherman was successful in negotiating other treaties , such as the removal of Navajos from the Bosque Redondo to traditional lands in Western New Mexico . When the Medicine Lodge Treaty was broken in 1868 , Sherman authorized his subordinate in Missouri , Philip Sheridan , to conduct the Winter Campaign of 1868 – 69 ( of which the Battle of Washita River was a part ) , where Sheridan used hard @-@ war tactics similar to those he and Sherman had employed in the Civil War . Sherman was also involved with the trial of Satanta and Big Tree : he ordered that the two chiefs should be tried as common criminals for their role in the Warren Wagon Train Raid , a raid that came dangerously close to killing Sherman himself . 
 = = General of the Army = = 
 On July 25 , 1866 , Congress created the rank of General of the Army for Grant and then promoted Sherman to lieutenant general . When Grant became president in 1869 , Sherman was appointed Commanding General of the United States Army and promoted to General of the Army . After the death of John A. Rawlins , Sherman also served for one month as interim Secretary of War . His tenure as commanding general was marred by political difficulties , many of which stemmed from disagreements with Secretaries of War Rawlins and William W. Belknap , who Sherman felt had usurped too much of the Commanding General 's powers , reducing him to a sinecure office . Sherman also clashed with Eastern humanitarians , who were critical of the Army 's killing of Indians and had apparently found an ally in President Grant . To escape these difficulties , from 1874 to 1876 , he moved his headquarters to St. Louis , Missouri , returning to Washington only upon the appointment of Alphonso Taft as Secretary of War and the promise of more authority . 
 Much of Sherman 's time as Commanding General was devoted to making the Western and Plains states safe for settlement through the continuation of the Indian Wars , which three significant campaigns during this time being the Modoc War , the Great Sioux War of 1876 and the Nez Perce War . The displacement of Indians was facilitated by the growth of the railroad and the eradication of the buffalo . Sherman believed that the intentional eradication of the buffalo should be encouraged as a means of weakening Indian resistance to assimilation . He voiced this view in remarks to a joint session of the Texas legislature in 1875 . However he never engaged in any program to actually eradicate the buffalo . During this time , Sherman reorganized frontier forts to reflect the shifting frontier . 
 After George Armstrong Custer 's defeat at the Battle of Little Bighorn , Sherman wrote that " hostile savages like Sitting Bull and his band of outlaw Sioux ... must feel the superior power of the Government . " He further wrote that " during an assault , the soldiers can not pause to distinguish between male and female , or even discriminate as to age . " Despite his harsh treatment of the warring tribes , Sherman spoke out against the unfair way speculators and government agents treated the natives within the reservations . 
 In 1875 Sherman published his memoirs in two volumes . According to critic Edmund Wilson , Sherman : 
 [ H ] ad a trained gift of self @-@ expression and was , as Mark Twain says , a master of narrative . [ In his Memoirs ] the vigorous account of his pre @-@ war activities and his conduct of his military operations is varied in just the right proportion and to just the right degree of vivacity with anecdotes and personal experiences . We live through his campaigns [ ... ] in the company of Sherman himself . He tells us what he thought and what he felt , and he never strikes any attitudes or pretends to feel anything he does not feel . 
 During the election of 1876 , Southern Democrats who supported Wade Hampton for governor used mob violence to attack and intimidate African American voters in Charleston , South Carolina . Republican Governor Daniel Chamberlain appealed to President Ulysses S. Grant for military assistance . In October 1876 , President Ulysses S. Grant , after issuing a proclamation , instructed Sherman to gather all available Atlantic region troops and dispatch them to South Carolina to stop the mob violence . 
 On June 19 , 1879 , Sherman delivered an address to the graduating class of the Michigan Military Academy , in which he may have uttered the famous phrase " War Is Hell " . On April 11 , 1880 , he addressed a crowd of more than 10 @,@ 000 at Columbus , Ohio : " There is many a boy here today who looks on war as all glory , but , boys , it is all hell . " In 1945 , President Harry S. Truman would say : " Sherman was wrong . I 'm telling you I find peace is hell . " 
 One of Sherman 's significant contributions as head of the Army was the establishment of the Command School ( now the Command and General Staff College ) at Fort Leavenworth in 1881 . Sherman stepped down as commanding general on November 1 , 1883 , and retired from the army on February 8 , 1884 . 
 = = Later years = = 
 He lived most of the rest of his life in New York City . He was devoted to the theater and to amateur painting and was much in demand as a colorful speaker at dinners and banquets , in which he indulged a fondness for quoting Shakespeare . During this period , he stayed in contact with war veterans , and through them accepted honorary membership into the Phi Kappa Psi Fraternity and the Irving Literary Society . Sherman was proposed as a Republican candidate for the presidential election of 1884 , but declined as emphatically as possible , saying , " I will not accept if nominated and will not serve if elected . " Such a categorical rejection of a candidacy is now referred to as a " <unk> statement . " 
 In 1888 he joined the newly formed Boone and Crockett Club , a wildlife conservation organization founded by Theodore Roosevelt and George Bird Grinnell . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Sherman died of pneumonia in New York City at 1 : 50 PM on February 14 , 1891 . President Benjamin Harrison sent a telegram to General Sherman 's family and ordered all national flags to be flown at half mast . Harrison , in a message to the Senate and the House of Representatives , wrote that : 
 He was an ideal soldier , and shared to the fullest the esprit du corps of the army , but he cherished the civil institutions organized under the Constitution , and was only a soldier that these might be perpetuated in undiminished usefulness and honor . 
 = = Religious views = = 
 Sherman 's birth family was Presbyterian and he was originally baptized as such . His foster family , including his future wife Ellen , were devout Catholics , and Sherman was re @-@ baptized and later married in the Catholic rite . According to his son Thomas , who became a Catholic priest , Sherman attended the Catholic Church until the outbreak of the Civil War , but not thereafter . In 1888 , Sherman wrote publicly that " my immediate family are strongly Catholic . I am not and cannot be . " A memoirist reports that Sherman told him in 1887 that " my family is strongly Roman Catholic , but I am not . " Sherman was buried at Calvary Catholic Cemetery in St. Louis , Missouri . 
 On 19 February , a funeral service was held at his home , followed by a military procession . General Joseph E. Johnston , the Confederate officer who had commanded the resistance to Sherman 's troops in Georgia and the Carolinas , served as a pallbearer in New York City . It was a bitterly cold day and a friend of Johnston , fearing that the general might become ill , asked him to put on his hat . Johnston famously replied : " If I were in [ Sherman 's ] place , and he were standing in mine , he would not put on his hat . " Johnston did catch a serious cold and died one month later of pneumonia . 
 General Sherman 's body was then transported to St. Louis , where another service was conducted on 21 February 1891 at a local Catholic church . His son , Thomas Ewing Sherman , a Jesuit priest , presided over his father 's funeral mass . Sherman is buried in Calvary Cemetery in St. Louis . 
 = = Monuments = = 
 Major monuments to Sherman include the gilded bronze Sherman Memorial ( 1902 ) by Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens at the main entrance to Central Park in New York City , and the Sherman Monument ( 1903 ) by Carl Rohl @-@ Smith near President 's Park in Washington , D.C. The Sherman Monument ( 1900 ) in Muskegon , Michigan features a bronze statue by John Massey Rhind , and the Sherman Monument ( 1903 ) in Arlington National Cemetery features a smaller version of Saint @-@ Gaudens 's equestrian statue . Copies of Saint @-@ Gaudens 's Bust of William Tecumseh Sherman are in the Metropolitan Museum of Art , and elsewhere . 
 Other posthumous tributes include Sherman Circle in the Petworth neighborhood of Washington , DC , the naming of the World War II M4 Sherman tank , and the " General Sherman " Giant Sequoia tree , the most massive documented single @-@ trunk tree in the world . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 In the years immediately after the war , Sherman 's conservative politics was attractive to white Southerners . By the 1880s , however , Southern " Lost Cause " writers began to demonize Sherman for his attacks on civilians in the " March . " The Confederate Veteran magazine , based in Nashville , gave Sherman more attention than anyone else , in part to enhance the visibility of the western theater . His devastation of railroads and plantations mattered less than the March 's insult to southern dignity , especially its unprotected womanhood . Moody criticizes English historians Field Marshal Viscount Garnet Wolseley , Maj. Gen. John F. C. Fuller , and especially Capt. Basil H. Liddell Hart , who built up Sherman 's reputation by exaggerating his " atrocities " and filtering his actions through their ideas about modern warfare . 
 By contrast Sherman was a popular hero in the North and well regarded by his soldiers . Military historians have paid special attention to his Atlanta campaign and the March to the Sea , generally giving him high marks as an innovative strategist and quick @-@ witted tactician . 
 = = = Autobiography and memoirs = = = 
 Around 1868 , Sherman began to write a " private " recollection for his children about his life before the Civil War , identified now as his unpublished " Autobiography , 1828 – 1861 " . This manuscript is held by the Ohio Historical Society . Much of the material in it would eventually be incorporated in revised form in his memoirs . 
 In 1875 , ten years after the end of the Civil War , Sherman became one of the first Civil War generals to publish a memoir . His Memoirs of General William T. Sherman . By Himself , published by D. Appleton & Co . , in two volumes , began with the year 1846 ( when the Mexican War began ) and ended with a chapter about the " military lessons of the [ civil ] war " ( 1875 edition : Volume I ; Volume II ) . The memoirs were controversial , and sparked complaints from many quarters . Grant ( serving as President when Sherman 's memoirs first appeared ) later remarked that others had told him that Sherman treated Grant unfairly but " when I finished the book , I found I approved every word ; that ... it was a true book , an honorable book , creditable to Sherman , just to his companions — to myself particularly so — just such a book as I expected Sherman would write . " 
 In 1886 , after the publication of Grant 's memoirs , Sherman produced a " second edition , revised and corrected " of his memoirs with Appleton . The new edition added a second preface , a chapter about his life up to 1846 , a chapter concerning the post @-@ war period ( ending with his 1884 retirement from the army ) , several appendices , portraits , improved maps , and an index ( 1886 edition : Volume I , Volume II ) . For the most part , Sherman refused to revise his original text on the ground that " I disclaim the character of historian , but assume to be a witness on the stand before the great tribunal of history " and " any witness who may disagree with me should publish his own version of [ the ] facts in the truthful narration of which he is interested . " However , Sherman did add the appendices , in which he published the views of some others . 
 Subsequently , Sherman shifted to the publishing house of Charles L. Webster & Co . , the publisher of Grant 's memoirs . The new publishing house brought out a " third edition , revised and corrected " in 1890 . This difficult @-@ to @-@ find edition was substantively identical to the second ( except for the probable omission of Sherman 's short 1875 and 1886 prefaces ) . 
 After Sherman died in 1891 , there were dueling new editions of his memoirs . His first publisher , Appleton , reissued the original ( 1875 ) edition with two new chapters about Sherman 's later years added by the journalist W. Fletcher Johnson ( 1891 Johnson edition : Volume I , Volume II ) . Meanwhile , Charles L. Webster & Co. issued a " fourth edition , revised , corrected , and complete " with the text of Sherman 's second edition , a new chapter prepared under the auspices of the Sherman family bringing the general 's life from his retirement to his death and funeral , and an appreciation by politician James G. Blaine ( who was related to Sherman 's wife ) . Unfortunately , this edition omits Sherman 's prefaces to the 1875 and 1886 editions ( 1891 Blaine edition : Volume I , Volume II ) . 
 In 1904 and 1913 , Sherman 's youngest son ( Philemon Tecumseh Sherman ) republished the memoirs , ironically with Appleton ( not Charles L. Webster & Co . ) . This was designated as a " second edition , revised and corrected " . This edition contains Sherman 's two prefaces , his 1886 text , and the materials added in the 1891 Blaine edition . Thus , this virtually invisible edition of Sherman 's memoirs is actually the most comprehensive version . 
 There are many modern editions of Sherman 's memoirs . The edition most useful for research purposes is the 1990 Library of America version , edited by Charles Royster . It contains the entire text of Sherman 's 1886 edition , together with annotations , a note on the text , and a detailed chronology of Sherman 's life . Missing from this edition is the useful biographical material contained in the 1891 Johnson and Blaine editions . 
 = = = Published correspondence = = = 
 Many of Sherman 's official war @-@ time letters ( and other items ) appear in the Official Records of the War of the Rebellion . Some of these letters are rather personal in nature , rather than relating directly to operational activities of the army . There also are at least five published collections of Sherman correspondence : 
 Sherman 's Civil War : Selected Correspondence of William T. Sherman , 1860 – 1865 , edited by Brooks D. Simpson and Jean V. Berlin ( Chapel Hill : The University of North Carolina Press , 1999 ) – a large collection of war @-@ time letters ( November 1860 to May 1865 ) . 
 Sherman at War , edited by Joseph H. Ewing ( Dayton , OH : Morningside , 1992 ) – approximately thirty war time letters to Sherman 's father @-@ in @-@ law , Thomas Ewing , and one of his brothers @-@ in @-@ law , Philemon B. Ewing . 
 Home Letters of General Sherman , edited by M.A. <unk> Howe ( New York : Charles Scribner 's Son , 1909 ) – edited letters to his wife , Ellen Ewing Sherman , from 1837 to 1888 . 
 The Sherman Letters : Correspondence Between General Sherman and Senator Sherman from 1837 to 1891 , edited by Rachel Sherman Thorndike ( New York : Charles Scribner 's Son , 1894 ) – edited letters to his brother , Senator John Sherman , from 1837 to 1891 . 
 General W.T. Sherman as College President , edited by Walter L. Fleming ( Cleveland : The Arthur H. Clark Co . , 1912 ) – edited letters and other documents from Sherman 's 1859 – 1861 service as superintendent of the Louisiana Seminary of Learning and Military Academy . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 The presentation of Sherman in popular culture is now discussed at book @-@ length in Sherman 's March in Myth and Memory ( Rowman and Littlefield , 2008 ) , by Edward Caudill and Paul Ashdown . Some of the artistic treatments of Sherman 's march are the Civil War era song " Marching Through Georgia " by Henry Clay Work ; Herman Melville 's poem " The March to the Sea " ; Ross McElwee 's film Sherman 's March ; and E. L. Doctorow 's novel The March . 
 At the beginning of Margaret Mitchell 's novel Gone with the Wind , first published in 1936 , the fictional character Rhett Butler warns a group of upper @-@ class secessionists of the folly of war with the North in terms very reminiscent of those Sherman directed to David F. Boyd before leaving Louisiana . Sherman 's invasion of Georgia later plays a central role in the plot of the novel . 
 Charles Beaumont in the Twilight Zone episode " Long Live Walter Jameson " has the lead character ( a history professor ) comment on the burning of Atlanta that the union soldiers did it unwillingly at the behest of a Sherman described as sullen and brutish . 
 In the Academy Award winning Errol Morris documentary The Fog of War , Robert McNamara recalls an anecdote he read about Sherman during the Civil War , in which the mayor of Atlanta pleaded with Sherman for mercy before he torched the city to the ground , to which Sherman responded , " War is cruelty . " McNamara uses the story as a parallel to the usage of Agent Orange during the Vietnam War , while he was Secretary of Defense , to illustrate the ninth lesson of the film : " In order to do good , you may have to engage in evil . " 
 = = = Sherman on U.S. postage = = = 
 Sherman is one of the few generals to have appeared on several different US postage stamp issues . The first stamp issue to honor him was released on March 21 , 1893 , a little more than two years after his death . The engraving was modeled after a photograph taken by Napoleon <unk> in 1888 . The Post Office released a second and third Sherman issue of 1895 , both almost identical to the first issue , with slight changes in the framework design and color . Sherman appeared again in the US Army issue of 1937 , a commemorative postage stamp jointly honoring Generals Sherman , Grant and Sheridan . The last stamp issue to honor Sherman was released in 1995 and was a 32 @-@ cent stamp . With five different issues to his name , Sherman has featured more prominently in US postage than most US presidents . 
 = = = Sherman name in the military = = = 
 Sherman lent his name to the Sherman tank . The USS General Sherman , a Civil War gunboat , was also named after him as was Fort Sherman . 
 = = Dates of rank = = 
 Second lieutenant , USA – July 1840 
 First lieutenant , USA – November 1841 
 Captain , USA – September 1850 
 Colonel , USA – 14 May 1861 
 Brigadier general , of Volunteers – 17 May 1861 
 Major general of Volunteers – 1 May 1862 
 Brigadier general , USA – 4 July 1863 
 Major general , USA – 12 August 1864 
 Lieutenant general , USA – 25 July 1866 
 General , USA – 4 March 1869 
 = = Writings = = 
 General Sherman 's Official Account of His Great March to Georgia and the Carolinas , from His Departure from Chattanooga to the Surrender of General Joseph E. Johnston and Confederate Forces under His Command ( 1865 ) 
 " Autobiography , 1828 – 1861 " ( c . 1868 ) , <unk> . 57 , <unk> Papers , Ohio Historical Society . Private recollections for Sherman 's children . 
 Memoirs of General William T. Sherman , Written by Himself ( 1875 ) , 2d ed. with additional chapters ( 1886 ) 
 Reports of Inspection Made in the Summer of 1877 by Generals P. H. Sheridan and W. T. Sherman of Country North of the Union Pacific Railroad ( co @-@ author , 1878 ) 
 The Sherman Letters : Correspondence between General and Senator Sherman from 1837 to 1891 ( posthumous , 1894 ) 
 Home Letters of General Sherman ( posthumous , 1909 ) 
 General W. T. Sherman as College President : A Collection of Letters , Documents , and Other Material , Chiefly from Private Sources , Relating to the Life and Activities of General William Tecumseh Sherman , to the Early Years of Louisiana State University , and the Stirring Conditions Existing in the South on the Eve of the Civil War ( posthumous , 1912 ) 
 The William Tecumseh Sherman Family Letters ( posthumous , 1967 ) . Microfilm collection prepared by the Archives of the University of Notre Dame contains letters , etc. from Sherman , his wife , and others . 
 Sherman at War ( posthumous , 1992 ) 
 Sherman 's Civil War : Selected Correspondence of William T. Sherman , 1860 – 1865 ( posthumous , 1999 ) 
 = Daniel J. Callaghan = 
 Daniel Judson Callaghan ( July 26 , 1890 – November 13 , 1942 ) was a United States Navy officer who received the Medal of Honor posthumously for his actions during the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal . In a career spanning just over 30 years , he served his country in two wars . He served on several ships during his first 20 years of service , including escort duties during World War I , and also filled some shore @-@ based administrative roles . He later came to the attention of US President Franklin Roosevelt , who appointed Callaghan as his Naval Aide in 1938 . A few years later , he returned to command duties during the early stages of World War II . Callaghan was killed by an enemy shell on the bridge of his flagship , the USS San Francisco ( CA @-@ 38 ) , during a surface action against a larger Japanese force off Savo Island . The battle ended in a strategic victory for the Allied side . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Callaghan was born on July 26 , 1890 , in San Francisco , California , the son of businessman Charles William Callaghan and Rose Wheeler Callaghan . The family was devout Roman Catholic . One of his younger brothers , William Callaghan ( 1897 – 1991 ) , would later go on to a career in the US Navy as well . Both brothers studied at Saint Ignatius College Preparatory in San Francisco , the elder graduating in the class of 1907 . He then graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 1911 . His first assignment was on board the armored cruiser USS California ( ACR @-@ 6 ) , in command of a turret with twin 8 @-@ inch guns . He was promoted to the rank of Ensign on May 21 , 1912 . 
 His second assignment was on the destroyer USS Truxtun ( DD @-@ 14 ) in mid @-@ 1913 . He was promoted to Lieutenant ( Junior Grade ) in May 1915 . In his first few years of service , he developed a reputation as a conscientious sailor , noted for avoiding heavy alcohol consumption and regularly attending Mass . His dedication to naval gunnery also became apparent . Some years later , one of his captains , Joel Pringle , would write : " [ Callaghan 's ] devotion to duty , sound judgment and ability to inspire loyalty in his subordinates have resulted in a constant and steady increase in the efficiency of the above mentioned batteries . At the recent battle practice of the Pacific Fleet in 5 @-@ inch guns , he made the largest percentage of hits of any ship of the Fleet . " 
 During his first few years of naval service , Callaghan had been courting Mary Tormey of Oakland , California ; the two married on July 23 , 1914 . Their son , Daniel Judson Callaghan Jr . , was born in Alameda , California , on October 16 , 1915 . 
 In July 1915 , the Truxtun was on its way to Alaska when it broke down and was unable to continue its mission . Initially , the blame fell on Callaghan , who had apparently ordered incorrect parts for the condenser . He was suspended from duty and ordered to appear before a court @-@ martial . Subsequent investigation , however , found that another man was responsible for the error and Callaghan received a full acquittal and was reinstated . A few months later , he was appointed as commanding officer of the Truxtun , but the stress of his trial appeared to have left its mark — at the age of 25 years , his hair had already turned gray . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Callaghan 's next posting was to the cruiser USS New Orleans ( CL @-@ 22 ) in November 1916 . Following the entry of the United States into World War I , in April 1917 , the New Orleans escorted cargo ships crossing the Atlantic Ocean . It was at this time that he first met Ross McIntire , a surgeon , who would later have a significant impact on his career . According to biographer Francis Murphy , Callaghan played a pivotal role in the rescue of a disabled British liner off the coast of Ireland : " Four times a hawser was hauled aboard the cruiser from the liner , that was about three times the cruiser 's size , and four times the cable parted . The Captain was for abandoning the job . But not Dan . With superhuman strength and the full cooperation of his men , he finally secured the cable . For forty @-@ eight hours the New Orleans stayed with the stricken vessel hauling it out of danger [ and ] finally handing it on to tugs from a North Ireland base . " 
 Following the war , he settled in Georgetown , Washington , D.C. for two years with his wife and young son . During this time , he worked on reassignment of warrant and chief petty officers from the navy . Callaghan next served aboard the newly commissioned battleship USS Idaho ( BB @-@ 42 ) , commencing in October 1920 . While his family moved back to Oakland , he began serving as a fire control officer on the Idaho . He left the Idaho in June 1923 , returning to shore duties for two years before taking up the position of First Lieutenant on the USS Colorado ( BB @-@ 45 ) in May 1925 . The Colorado transported a shipment of gold to Australia before returning to the United States in 1926 . His next assignment was the position of gunnery officer , on board the USS Mississippi ( BB @-@ 41 ) . Captain Thomas Hart wrote of Callaghan : " I can scarcely report too favorably on this officer . He is excellent generally and particularly ; and he looks and acts the part . As gunnery officer , he is being highly successful and I unhesitatingly recommend him for almost any detail . " 
 Callaghan left the Mississippi in July 1928 and worked in naval inspections for the next two years . He served as Aide to the Commander in Chief , US Fleet , and was promoted to the rank of Commander in June 1931 . He then served as Executive Officer of the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps at the University of California , Berkeley , before working on the USS Portland ( CA @-@ 33 ) . In 1938 , US President Franklin Roosevelt asked his physician , Ross McIntire , to recommend someone for the position of Naval Aide . McIntire recommended Callaghan , who was appointed to the role in July 1938 and would fill it for the next three years . He was promoted to the rank of Captain in October 1938 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In May 1941 , during the early stages of World War II , Roosevelt released Callaghan to take command of the cruiser USS San Francisco ( CA @-@ 38 ) . Roosevelt wrote : " It is with great regret that I am letting Captain Callaghan leave as my Naval Aide . He has given every satisfaction and has performed duties of many varieties with tact and real efficiency . He has shown a real understanding of the many problems of the service within itself and in relationship to the rest of Government . " 
 In April 1942 , he was promoted to the rank of rear admiral and was appointed as chief of staff to the Commander , South Pacific Area and South Pacific Force Vice Admiral Robert L. Ghormley . In November , as commander of Task Group 67 @.@ 4 , he led US forces in an engagement off Savo Island during the Guadalcanal Campaign . During this battle , he was on the bridge of the USS San Francisco when incoming enemy fire killed him and most of his command staff on November 13 , 1942 . At that time , he became the third US Navy admiral killed in action during World War II . He received the Medal of Honor posthumously for his efforts in this battle . 
 Following the explosion , Lieutenant Commander Bruce McCandless assumed operational command of the San Francisco . Earlier in the battle , Rear Admiral Norman Scott had been killed , so two US commanders had now been lost , as well as several of their staff . Despite the deaths of so many senior officers , the battle ended in a strategic victory for the Allied side . 
 In hindsight , Callaghan was criticized for not putting his five ships that had the superior SG radar systems at the ends of his column , for not using one of them as his flagship , for directing the battle from his flagship 's bridge instead of the radar plot , for not issuing his battle plans to his captains , and for issuing confusing orders during the battle . Analysis of the battle led to a rapid improvement in USN techniques for fighting in poor visibility , particularly in the adoption of combat information centers . 
 Callaghan was buried at sea . He was survived by his wife , Mary Tormey Callaghan , and son , Daniel Judson Callaghan Jr . ( 1915 – 2006 ) . His brother William Callaghan would later become a US Navy vice admiral , first captain of the USS Missouri ( BB @-@ 63 ) , and first commander of the Military Sea Transportation Service . 
 By order of President Roosevelt , both Rear Admirals Callaghan and Scott were posthumously awarded the Navy Medal of Honor . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 = = = Medal of Honor = = = 
 Callaghan 's Medal of Honor citation read : 
 For extraordinary heroism and conspicuous intrepidity above and beyond the call of duty during action against enemy Japanese forces off Savo Island on the night of 12 – 13 November 1942 . Although out @-@ balanced in strength and numbers by a desperate and determined enemy , Rear Admiral Callaghan , with ingenious tactical skill and superb coordination of the units under his command , led his forces into battle against tremendous odds , thereby contributing decisively to the rout of a powerful invasion fleet and to the consequent frustration of a formidable Japanese offensive . While faithfully directing close @-@ range operations in the face of furious bombardment by superior enemy fire power , he was killed on the bridge of his Flagship . His courageous initiative , inspiring leadership , and judicious foresight in a crisis of grave responsibility were in keeping with the finest traditions of the United States Naval Service . He gallantly gave his life in the defense of his country . 
 His son was a Lieutenant ( junior grade ) at the time , and accepted his father 's Medal of Honor on his behalf . 
 = = = Other honors = = = 
 Prior to receiving the Medal of Honor , Callaghan had been awarded the Distinguished Service Medal . Other awards to Admiral Callaghan include the World War I Victory Medal , the American Defense Service Medal and posthumous awards of the Purple Heart , Asiatic @-@ Pacific Campaign Medal and World War II Victory Medal . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The US Navy has named two ships after Callaghan : USS Callaghan ( DD @-@ 792 ) and USS Callaghan ( DDG @-@ 994 ) . The first ship was commissioned on November 27 , 1943 , and was sponsored by Callaghan 's widow . It sank in late July , 1945 , as the result of a kamikaze attack . The second ship was commissioned on August 29 , 1981 , one of a class named for the four American admirals killed in World War II , and sold to Taiwan just over 20 years later . 
 Callaghan 's name is listed on Tablets of the Missing at Manila American Cemetery in the Philippines . Callaghan Hall at Officer Training Command , Newport , Rhode Island , is named in his honor . The Callaghan Fitness Center at Norfolk Naval Shipyard in Portsmouth Virginia is also named for him . A street , Admiral Callaghan Lane in Vallejo , California , is also named after him , and a monument in Lands End , San Francisco ( including part of the bridge of the USS San Francisco , where he died ) , honors him and his comrades . 
 = My Back Pages = 
 " My Back Pages " is a song written by Bob Dylan and included on his 1964 album Another Side of Bob Dylan . It is stylistically similar to his earlier folk protest songs and features Dylan 's voice with an acoustic guitar accompaniment . However , its lyrics — in particular the refrain " Ah , but I was so much older then / I 'm younger than that now " — have been interpreted as a rejection of Dylan 's earlier personal and political idealism , illustrating his growing disillusionment with the 1960 's folk protest movement with which he was associated , and his desire to move in a new direction . Although Dylan wrote the song in 1964 , he did not perform it live until 1978 . 
 " My Back Pages " has been covered by artists as diverse as Keith Jarrett , the Byrds , the Ramones , the Nice , Steve Earle , and the Hollies . The Byrds ' version , initially released on their 1967 album Younger Than Yesterday , was also issued as a single in 1967 and proved to be the band 's last Top 40 hit in the U.S. 
 = = Writing , recording and performance = = 
 Bob Dylan wrote " My Back Pages " in 1964 as one of the last songs — perhaps the last song — composed for his Another Side of Bob Dylan album . He recorded it on June 9 , 1964 under the working title of " Ancient Memories " , the last song committed to tape for the album . The song was partly based on the traditional folk song " Young But Growing " and has a mournful melody similar to that of " The Lonesome Death of Hattie Carroll " from Dylan 's previous album , The Times They Are a @-@ Changin ' . As with the other songs on Another Side , Dylan is the sole musician on " My Back Pages " and plays in a style similar to his previous protest songs , with a sneering , rough @-@ edged voice and a hard @-@ strumming acoustic guitar accompaniment . 
 In the song 's lyrics , Dylan criticizes himself for having been certain that he knew everything and apologizes for his previous political preaching , noting that he has become his own enemy " in the instant that I preach . " Dylan questions whether one can really distinguish between right and wrong , and even questions the desirability of the principle of equality . The lyrics also signal Dylan 's disillusionment with the 1960s protest movement and his intention to abandon protest songwriting . The song effectively <unk> the protest movement to the establishment it is trying to overturn , concluding with the refrain : 
 Ah , but I was so much older then 
 I 'm younger than that now 
 Music critic Robert Shelton has interpreted this refrain as " an internal dialogue between what he [ Dylan ] once accepted and now doubts . " Shelton also notes that the refrain maps a path from <unk> experience to the innocence of William Wordsworth . The refrain has also been interpreted as Dylan celebrating his " bright , new post @-@ protest future . " 
 Dylan 's disenchantment with the protest movement had previously surfaced in a speech he had given in December 1963 when accepting an award from the Emergency Civil Liberties Committee ( <unk> ) in New York . Author Mike Marqusee has commented that " No song on Another Side distressed Dylan 's friends in the movement more than ' My Back Pages ' in which he transmutes the rude incoherence of his <unk> rant into the organized density of art . The lilting refrain ... must be one of the most lyrical expressions of political apostasy ever penned . It is a recantation , in every sense of the word . " 
 In an interview with the Sheffield University Paper in May 1965 , Dylan explained the change that had occurred in his songwriting over the previous twelve months , noting " The big difference is that the songs I was writing last year ... they were what I call one @-@ dimensional songs , but my new songs I 'm trying to make more three @-@ dimensional , you know , there 's more symbolism , they 're written on more than one level . " In late 1965 , Dylan commented on the writing of " My Back Pages " specifically during an interview with Margaret Steen for The Toronto Star : " I was in my New York phase then , or at least , I was just coming out of it . I was still keeping the things that are really really real out of my songs , for fear they 'd be misunderstood . Now I don 't care if they are . " As Dylan stated to Nat Hentoff at the time that " My Back Pages " and the other songs on Another Side of Bob Dylan were written , " There aren 't any finger pointing songs [ here ] ... Now a lot of people are doing finger pointing songs . You know , pointing to all the things that are wrong . Me , I don 't want to write for people anymore . You know , be a spokesman . " 
 Dylan did not play " My Back Pages " in concert until June 11 , 1988 , during a performance in Mountain View , California . The arrangement he used eliminated some of the song 's verses and included an electric guitar part performed by session musician G. E. Smith . Since 1988 , Dylan has played the song in concert many times in both electric and semi @-@ acoustic versions , and sometimes as an acoustic encore . At the 30th Anniversary Tribute Concert to Dylan at Madison Square Garden in 1992 , Dylan performed " My Back Pages " , in the Byrds ' arrangement , with George Harrison , Eric Clapton , Tom Petty , Neil Young , and Roger McGuinn . This performance , which featured vocals from all six musicians , along with guitar solos by Clapton and Young , was released on The 30th Anniversary Concert Celebration album in 1993 . 
 In addition to its initial appearance on Another Side of Bob Dylan , " My Back Pages " has also appeared on a number of Dylan compilation albums . In the United States and Europe , it appeared on the 1971 album Bob Dylan 's Greatest Hits Vol . II ( aka More Bob Dylan Greatest Hits ) and on the 2007 album Dylan . In Australia , the song was included on the 1994 compilation album Greatest Hits Vol . 3 . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 = = = The Byrds ' version = = = 
