 = = Release history = = 
 The original release , running for one hour , only featured the live footage . The film was scheduled for a special premiere at London 's Rainbow Theatre , on 25 November 1972 . It was cancelled at the last minute by the theatre 's owner , Rank Strand as they didn 't have a certificate from the British Board of Film Censors and the theatre could be seen to be in competition with established cinemas . 
 Maben was concerned that one of the problems with the film was that it was too short . In early 1973 , Maben was fly fishing with Waters , and suggested the possibility of improving the film by watching them at work in a recording studio . Subsequently , Maben was invited with a small crew using a single 35 mm camera to Abbey Road Studios to film supposed recording sessions of The Dark Side of the Moon , as well as interviews conducted off @-@ camera by Maben , and footage of the band eating and talking at the studio cafeteria . Maben was particularly happy about this footage , feeling it captured the spontaneous humour of the band . This version premiered on 21 August 1974 , and ran for 80 minutes . The recording sessions were actually staged for the film , as the recording of the album had been completed when these sessions were filmed in January 1973 and the band was mixing the album at the time . 
 The film wasn 't financially successful according to Mason , though Maben disagrees , and suffered particularly from being overshadowed by the release of The Dark Side of the Moon not long after the original theatrical showing . It was released on various home video formats several times . 
 In 2003 , the director 's cut version of the film was released , running for 92 minutes . In addition to the concert and interview footage , it includes more overlaid imagery including footage from the Apollo space program and computer @-@ generated images of space and Pompeii , and overall has a busier , " updated " feel . The original 1 @.@ 37 : 1 aspect footage is cropped to 1 @.@ 78 : 1 in this version . The DVD also contains the original one @-@ hour cut in its original aspect ratio as a bonus , a collection of black @-@ and @-@ white footage of the band in Paris filmed by Maben in 1972 , and an extensive interview with the director . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Maben was particularly pleased with positive reviews that came out of the film 's showing at the Edinburgh International Film Festival , but was disappointed to hear one New York critic describe it " like the size of an ant crawling around the great treasures of Pompeii . " 
 Billboard magazine was not enthusiastic about the 1974 re @-@ release , thinking it looked dated , and stated that the film was " dull , unimaginative and hokey , and does not do justice to the Pink Floyd Vision " . However , more recent reviews have been favourable . Billboard reviewed a video release in 1984 , and on this occasion , Faye Zuckerman , while not particularly keen on the footage in the Abbey Road canteen , stated it was " vastly superior to most other concert movies " . Reviewing the Director 's Cut DVD , Richie Unterberger said the film had " first @-@ rate cinematography " and was " undeniably impressive " , while Peter Marsh , reviewing for the BBC , stated it was " my favourite concert film of all time " , though his opinions of the new computer generated imagery were mixed . 
 = = Outtakes = = 
 Due to the lack of time in filming , no tracks were filmed that were unreleased , but several alternative shots and outtakes were held in the Archives du Film du Bois D 'Arcy near Paris . At some point , an employee of the owners , <unk> Productions , decided this footage was of no value and incinerated all 548 cans of the original 35 mm negatives . Maben was particularly frustrated about the lack of additional shots for " One of These Days , " which is primarily a Mason solo @-@ piece in the released version . Mason recalls the reason for that is that the reel of film featuring the other members was lost attempting to assemble the original cut . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = 1972 original film = = = 
 " Intro Song " 
 " Echoes , Part 1 " ( from Meddle , 1971 ) 
 " Careful with That Axe , Eugene " ( from Point Me At The Sky , B @-@ side , 1968 ) 
 " A Saucerful of Secrets " ( from A Saucerful of Secrets , 1968 ) 
 " One of These Days " ( from Meddle , 1971 ) 
 " Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun " ( from A Saucerful of Secrets , 1968 ) 
 " Mademoiselle Nobs " ( from Meddle , 1971 ) 
 " Echoes , Part 2 " ( from Meddle , 1971 ) 
 = = = 1974 theatrical version = = = 
 Featured on VHS , CED <unk> and Laserdisc releases . 
 " Intro Song " 
 " Echoes , Part 1 " ( from Meddle , 1971 ) 
 " On the Run " ( studio footage ) ( from The Dark Side of the Moon , 1973 ) 
 " Careful with That Axe , Eugene " ( from Point Me At The Sky , B @-@ side , 1968 ) 
 " A Saucerful of Secrets " ( from A Saucerful of Secrets , 1968 ) 
 " Us and Them " ( studio footage ) ( from The Dark Side of the Moon , 1973 ) 
 " One of These Days " ( from Meddle , 1971 ) 
 " Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun " ( from A Saucerful of Secrets , 1968 ) 
 " Brain Damage " ( studio footage ) ( from The Dark Side of the Moon , 1973 ) 
 " Mademoiselle Nobs " ( from Meddle , 1971 ) 
 " Echoes , Part 2 " ( from Meddle , 1971 ) 
 = = = 2003 director 's cut = = = 
 " Echoes , Part 1 " / " On the Run " ( studio footage ) ( uncredited ) ( from Meddle / The Dark Side of the Moon , 1971 / 1973 ) 
 " Careful with That Axe , Eugene " ( from Point Me At The Sky , B @-@ side , 1968 ) 
 " A Saucerful of Secrets " ( from A Saucerful of Secrets , 1968 ) 
 " Us and Them " ( studio footage ) ( from The Dark Side of the Moon , 1973 ) 
 " One of These Days " ( from Meddle , 1971 ) 
 " Mademoiselle Nobs " ( from Meddle , 1971 ) 
 " Brain Damage " ( studio footage ) ( from The Dark Side of the Moon , 1973 ) 
 " Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun " ( from A Saucerful of Secrets , 1968 ) 
 " Echoes , Part 2 " ( from Meddle , 1971 ) 
 Also Known as : 
 Echoes : Pink Floyd ( US ) 
 Pink Floyd in Pompeii ( Belgium ) 
 = = Credits = = 
 Pink Floyd 
 David Gilmour : lead guitar , slide guitar , harmonica on " Mademoiselle Nobs " , vocals on " Echoes " , " Careful with That Axe , Eugene " and " A Saucerful of Secrets " , additional vocals on " Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun " 
 Roger Waters : bass guitar , rhythm guitar on " Mademoiselle Nobs " , gong , cymbals , vocals on " Careful with That Axe , Eugene " and " Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun " 
 Richard Wright : Hammond organ , Farfisa Compact Duo organ , piano , vocals on " Echoes " 
 Nick Mason : drums , percussion , vocal phrase on " One of These Days " 
 Based on an idea and Directed by Adrian Maben 
 Cinematography : Willy <unk> , Gabor Pogany 
 Camera : Claude Agostini , Jaques <unk> , Henri <unk> , Gérard <unk> 
 Sound : Charles <unk> , Peter Watts 
 Script : Marie @-@ Noel <unk> 
 Road Managers : Chris Adamson , Robert Richardson , Brian Scott 
 Production Directors : Marc <unk> , Leonardo Pescarolo , Hans <unk> 
 Editor : José Pinheiro 
 Assistant Editor : Marie @-@ Claire Perret 
 Mixer : Paul <unk> 
 Special Effects : Michel Francois , Michel Y <unk> 
 Post Production : <unk> , Eclair , <unk> 
 Special thanks to : Professor <unk> ( University of Naples ) , Haroun <unk> , <unk> alle <unk> della Provincia di Napoli 
 Associate Producers : Michele Arnaud , Reiner Moritz 
 Executive Producer : Steve O 'Rourke 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The hip hop group the Beastie Boys made a music video for their song " Gratitude " that appears to be a homage to the film . Shot by David Perez in New Zealand , in addition to copying its directorial style of slow horizontal tracking shots , overhead shots of the drums , close up shots of the bass and multiple shots of guitar filling the screen , the video shows a number of speaker cabinets that the group managed to purchase , still labelled " Pink Floyd , London " . The video ends with a message that reads , " This video is dedicated to the memory of all the people who died at Pompeii . " The Beastie Boys claimed in interviews that the song and the video came about due to their desire to progress from being a straightforward hip hop group and add vintage instruments to their repertoire . 
 The rock band Korn filmed a similar show , Korn Live : The Encounter , in June 2010 to promote their ninth studio album , Korn III : Remember Who You Are . The show took place in a crop circle in Bakersfield , California , and had no audience beyond the crew workers . 
 Radiohead were noted for being fans of the film and regularly watched it when on tour . According to bassist Colin Greenwood , his brother Jonny made the whole band watch the film , saying " now this is how we should do videos , " Colin , however was critical of the direction , which he described as " Dave Gilmour sitting on his arse playing guitar and Roger Waters with long greasy hair , sandals and dusty flares , staggers over and picks up this big beater and whacks this gong . Ridiculous . " 
 = Disaster Transport = 
 Disaster Transport ( formerly Avalanche Run ) was an enclosed steel bobsled roller coaster built by Intamin at Cedar Point in Sandusky , Ohio , United States . It was notable as being the only indoor roller coaster at Cedar Point and the only bobsled roller coaster in the midwest at its debut . The name of the ride stems from " Dispatch Master Transport " . The origin of the name could still be seen in the ride 's logo in its later years . Before the ride was enclosed , the supports and outer sides of the track were painted blue . 
 = = History = = 
 Disaster Transport originally opened on May 11 , 1985 as Avalanche Run and was entirely outdoors . It was built next to the beach , on the former spot of Jumbo Jet and later , WildCat . Many other rides also had to be relocated . The original ride cost $ 3 @.@ 4 million : $ 1 @.@ 9 million to manufacture and $ 1 @.@ 5 million to install . 
 = = = Renovation = = = 
 In 1990 , <unk> Productions , Inc. was chosen to renovate the ride , completely enclosing it in a show building . The renovation included the addition of a space @-@ themed queue and ride along with special effect lighting and sound . The special effects and construction cost approximately $ 4 million . On the outside of the building , " 12 E " was written , which had caused numerous rumors as to its meanings . On August 3 , 2005 , it was revealed that it stood for the 12th ride designed by the <unk> employee , Eric . 
 Not long after the initial changes to the ride in 1990 , the special effects were not maintained and began to deteriorate . Most of the effects at its closure , were not active , or had been covered up . Blacklight reactant paint lined the walls , mostly in the form of handprints or outlines of scenes . These gave a 3 @-@ D appearance when the rider wore special glasses purchased at the beginning of the queue . 
 = = = Closure = = = 
 On July 13 , 2012 , Cedar Point announced that Disaster Transport would close on July 29 , 2012 . It was the second roller coaster at Cedar Point to close in 2012 . A charity auction was held for the final riders , benefiting the Give Kids the World charity foundation . The last ride was given at 11 : 53 PM on July 29 , with the lights turned on . The ride started demolition on August 6 , using about 380 trucks to transport scrap materials . A portion of track , two cars and the main entrance sign will be donated to the National Roller Coaster Museum . Less than a month later on August 29 at around 9 : 30 AM , the last section of Disaster Transport was demolished . The 12E part of the building was the last section left standing . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 Disaster Transport was a bobsled roller coaster , meaning the wheels were not attached to a track as on a conventional roller coaster . The cars — resembling bobsleds — operated within a steel trough , on which they were allowed to operate freely . This allowed the ride to swing from side to side when turning sharp corners , as an actual bobsled would . Guests would enter 10 passenger bobsleds , secured by a lap bar . After leaving the " launch area " , the bobsled traveled up the 63 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 19 m ) lift hill at a 15 @-@ degree @-@ angle , which featured red and blue blinking lights on the sides . After reaching the top of the lift hill , it curved to the right , dropping 50 feet ( 15 m ) at a 27 @-@ degree @-@ angle and reaching a top speed of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) . After that , it curved to the left into a mid course brake run . After the mid course brake run , the bobsled turned left followed by several banked turns and curves and two more brake runs . One cycle of the ride lasted about 2 minutes and 32 seconds . 
 = = = Theme = = = 
 After the ride was renovated in 1990 , a new space theme was given . The story of the ride was the passengers had been to deliver cargo from a suborbital factory to a station in Alaska . Large screen projections , simulated lasers , mist , and recordings were added to the ride . In the queue , guests would go through three rooms including Rocket Recovery , Mission Control and Repair Bay . The original entrance to the ride was located next to Troika . During HalloWeekends , the park would change the entrance of Disaster Transport to under the lift hill , leaving the one next to Troika to be used for the Halloween Haunt . For the 2009 season , the entrance was permanently changed to under the lift hill . When the entrance was changed , the Rocket Recovery and Mission Control rooms were closed , leaving the Repair Bay the only room guests walked through . 
 = = Building = = 
 The building was also used as a storage facility for the park . During HalloWeekends , much of the original queue area was used to house a haunt attraction . It was first used in 1997 for the haunt , Cedar Point Cemetery . In 2000 , it was transformed into the Egyptian themed , Pharaoh 's Secret haunted house . In 2009 , it was transformed into Happy Jack 's Toy Factory , a haunted toy factory . 
 The ride , though indoors , would close in any type of rain . Because of leaks in the structure , water pooled in the trough , warranting a shutdown . Typically , the ride would remain shut down after a period of rain as the crew would have to cycle several trains through the circuit in order for it to dry . Although the ride was enclosed , the storage track remained outdoors with a large door that opened when the storage track was needed . 
 = Simple Kind of Life = 
 " Simple Kind of Life " is a pop rock ballad written by Gwen Stefani for No Doubt 's fourth album Return of Saturn ( 2000 ) . The song contrasts Stefani 's desire to settle down and start a family with her commitment to the band . It received positive reviews from music critics , who noted the song 's somber melody and raw lyrics . 
 " Simple Kind of Life " was released as the album 's second single in June 2000 ( see 2000 in music , also " New " is a single from a soundtrack ) . It became the most successful American single from Return of Saturn , but had little international success . The accompanying music video illustrates the song 's themes of marriage and family . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 Singer Gwen Stefani wrote and composed the track during a last minute recording session . Stefani had been writing with bassist Tony Kanal that day , and she wrote the song late at night during what she referred to as " a PMS moment " . Following " Suspension Without Suspense " , " Simple Kind of Life " became the second song that Stefani wrote by herself . The song was recorded , with no rehearsals , the following Monday . Adrian Young 's drum parts were mixed through low fidelity filters to get the feel of a lo @-@ fi power ballad . 
 The lyrics of " Simple Kind of Life " also discuss Stefani 's relationship with Gavin Rossdale . She describes wanting to settle down , get married , and have children . In the final verse , she even dreams about how her life would be if there were a mistake in her birth control and she became pregnant . However , she contrasts this with her commitment to music and No Doubt . Stefani describes her relationship as unhealthy because of this disparity , comparing herself to " a sick domestic abuser looking for a fight . " She ultimately decides that settling down is just a fantasy for her since her freedom and independence is more important for her . 
 = = Music and structure = = 
 " Simple Kind of Life " is a pop rock song composed in the key of C major . It is written in common time and moves at a moderate tempo of 116 beats per minute . Stefani 's vocal range in the song covers nearly an octave and a half , from G3 to C5 . 
 The song opens with a four @-@ measure introduction , which introduces the Dm9 @-@ Cmaj7 modal chord progression used for the song 's three verses . Following each verse is the chorus , where the harmony switches to a Cmaj7 @-@ Em7 @-@ F @-@ B ♭ progression . A bridge entirely in D minor precedes the third verse . After the third chorus comes a coda , which closes the song as Stefani repeats the phrase " a simple kind of life " ad libitum while the song fades , as the song confirms its dreamy major tonality in a series of Cmaj7 and Fmaj7 chords . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Simple Kind of Life " received positive reviews from music critics . Rolling Stone described the song as being " at once grand , fragile and very , very sad " and commented that " it 's clear this woman whom many desire but few regard as a serious artist has penned a song that can sit on the same shelf with the likes of Elliott Smith and Aimee Mann . " Entertainment Weekly characterized the song as " manicured power pop " with a melody " buttery to the point of melting " . It later included the song in a list of No Doubt 's top five songs , referring to it as " musically understated ( layered guitar strumming and a melancholy melody ) , but lyrically devastating . " Slant Magazine found the song 's melodic structure odd , but was pleased by how it " unabashedly delivers double @-@ takes " . " Simple Kind of Life " was listed at number twenty @-@ eight on the 2000 Pazz & Jop list , a survey of several hundred music critics conducted by Robert Christgau . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Simple Kind of Life " was the most commercially successful single from Return of Saturn . Peaking at number 38 , it became the album 's only single to enter the Billboard Hot 100 . The song fared somewhat better in mainstream music , reaching number 32 on the Top 40 Mainstream and number 35 on the Top 40 Tracks . It had the most success with modern rock and adult contemporary stations , peaking at number 14 on the Modern Rock Tracks and number 18 on the Adult Top 40 . The single was a commercial failure outside of the U.S. It debuted at the bottom of the Dutch Mega Single Top 100 in mid @-@ June 2000 . It climbed up two positions the next week but exited the chart after its third week . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's music video was directed by Sophie Muller . It opens with a scene of Stefani and Kanal holding each other . During the chorus , she runs to a church while wearing a wedding dress designed after a fashion show by John Galliano , while her bandmates run after her . During the next verse , Stefani and guitarist Tom Dumont sit on a couch , and Stefani gets up on the table while Dumont plays an acoustic guitar . Stefani has a nightmare during the second chorus , in which she is in an endless hall full of wedding cakes , attempting to stop her bandmates from destroying them . There is then a dream sequence in which Stefani is backlit in front of a circle of stars . She sits with Young for the third verse , during which point in time a light in the shape of a birth control pills flashes , with one missing pill . This coincides with her line " Sometime I wished / For a mistake , " referencing her desire to get pregnant . In the video , Young quickly stands up and leaves after her line " You seem like you 'd be a good dad " to play with Dumont and Kanal . The band walks through a cemetery , and Stefani finds a baby . Her bandmates extend their arms to hold the baby , but Stefani hands the baby off to a woman and enters her trailer to remove her makeup . 
 Muller was staying with Stefani when the song was written , so Stefani stated that " it was obvious that she would be the one to do the video " when Stefani played Muller the song after writing it . Muller designed the video around the song 's lyrics because she felt that " there are very few [ songs ] that reveal as much in their lyrics " . The scenes were storyboarded so that Muller could give the band a chance to act out the scenes more . She set the band members up with props and filmed after giving loose suggestions . Muller originally intended for the dream sequence to show Stefani over a sea of orange juice but changed the scene based on Stefani 's performance . 
 The music video was unsuccessful on video chart programs . It debuted at number seven on MTV 's Total Request Live on April 24 , 2000 . The video made two more appearances later that week but was unable to reach a higher position and dropped out of the countdown . It was unable to chart on MuchMusic 's Countdown . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Move Like This = 
 Move Like This is the seventh , and , to date , final studio album by American rock band The Cars , released on May 10 , 2011 . The album is their first since 1987 's Door to Door and features all of the original band members except for bassist and vocalist Benjamin Orr , who died of pancreatic cancer in 2000 . The album reached the top ten of the Billboard 200 and peaked at number 2 on the Billboard Top Rock Albums chart ; a single from the album , " Sad Song " , reached number 33 on the Billboard Rock Songs chart . Following the release of the album , the band launched an eleven @-@ city tour of North America . 
 = = Background = = 
 Move Like This is the first reunion of The Cars to feature original lead singer , songwriter , rhythm guitarist , and co @-@ producer Ric Ocasek since their 1988 split . In 1997 , Ocasek told a journalist that the band would never reunite : " I 'm saying never and you can count on that . " A partial reunion of the band occurred in 2005 when keyboardist Greg Hawkes and lead guitarist Elliot Easton toured with singer Todd Rundgren , drummer Prairie Prince and bassist Kasim Sulton as " The New Cars " ; neither Ocasek nor Cars drummer David Robinson participated , and the Rundgren lineup split following two years of touring . 
 According to Paste magazine , Ocasek said that he was " amazed at how we clicked when we got back together . " Exclaim ! has noted that The Cars ' Facebook page featured a picture of producer Jacknife Lee , " which suggests that he will be producing the new album . " According to Rolling Stone , Lee produced five of the songs from the album ; The Cars themselves produced the others . 
 The Cars did not add a new bassist to the lineup to replace Orr ; instead , the album 's bass parts were programmed or performed by Hawkes and Lee , with Hawkes playing a bass once owned by Orr . While Ocasek and Orr split vocal duties on past albums , Ocasek sings lead on all the tracks from Move Like This . In a Rolling Stone interview , Ocasek said , " I was aware that on half of the new songs , Ben would have done better than I did . But we never wanted anybody from the outside . " Orr was given special thanks in the liner notes : " Ben , your spirit was with us on this one . " 
 According to Billboard , the album was recorded in engineer Paul Orofino 's studio in Millbrook , New York . Additional recording sessions were held in Los Angeles . The title of the album comes from a line in the song " Too Late " ; one of the working titles for the album was Sharp Subtle Flavor . Ocasek decided to title the album Move Like This as a reference to the band 's reputation for not moving around very much onstage . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 In October 2010 , the band released a one @-@ minute clip of " Sad Song " and a 73 @-@ second sample of another track from the album , " Blue Tip " , on their Facebook page ; a snippet from a third track , " Free " , was later posted on the band 's page . FMQB described " Free " as a " return to the classic Cars sound that fans know and love . " 
 On February 17 , 2011 , the band posted the full video for " Blue Tip " on their Facebook page . The first single , released in March , was the track " Sad Song " . Exclaim ! magazine comments that " [ d ] espite the title and lyrics , it doesn 't sound particularly sad , as it contains a cheery beat and a catchy mix of synths and guitars . " 
 Move Like This was released on May 10 , 2011 , and debuted at # 7 on the Billboard 200 albums chart . The album received generally positive reviews from critics : in a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half star review , Rolling Stone praised the " skillful restraint " of the band and Lee 's production work , describing the album as " taut , sleek , seamless , [ and ] efficient " . The A.V. Club awarded the album a " B " rating , praising the " catchy " " Blue Tip " and " Sad Song " , and noting the latter song 's similarity to " My Best Friend 's Girl " from the band 's 1978 debut . Allmusic reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine rated the album four out of five stars , describing the album as " as bright , infectious , and tuneful as the Cars at their prime . " Spin , however , granted the album a 5 out of 10 rating , criticizing the " clunkiness " of Ocasek 's lyrics . NPR 's Elizabeth Nelson called Move Like This a " fine new album " and singled out " Blue Tip " as " an incandescent pop gem " with a " brilliant " musical structure and " an absolutely relentless sing @-@ along chorus " . 
 = = North American tour = = 
 In April 2011 , the band announced a North American tour to support the album . The eleven @-@ city tour began May 10 in Seattle and concluded May 26 at the House of Blues in Boston . The performances and set lists were met with mixed reviews : Hollywood Reporter reviewer Erik Pedersen found Move Like This to be a " surprisingly good " album but described the May 12 Hollywood Palladium show as " icy " and unenthusiastic . San Jose Mercury News reviewer Jim Harrington described the band 's performance at Oakland 's Fox Theater as " incredibly flat and dispassionate " , but praised the band 's " solid " musicianship . 
 Songs performed on the tour include Move Like This tracks " Blue Tip " , " Keep on Knocking " , " Sad Song " , " Free " , " Drag on Forever " and " Hits Me " , as well as material from the band 's 1970s and 1980s albums . On the tour , Orr 's bass parts were performed by Hawkes on keyboard and bass ; the vocals on songs originally sung by Orr ( " Just What I Needed " , " Let 's Go " and " Moving in Stereo " ) were performed by Ocasek . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Ric Ocasek , except where noted . 
 = = = Best Buy edition = = = 
 This enhanced CD also has videos for " Sad Song " and " Blue Tip " . " Rocket USA " is a cover of a 1977 song by the American band Suicide , from their self @-@ titled debut . 
 = = = iTunes edition = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Tulip mania = 
 Tulip mania or tulipomania ( Dutch names include : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) was a period in the Dutch Golden Age during which contract prices for bulbs of the recently introduced tulip reached extraordinarily high levels and then suddenly collapsed . 
 At the peak of tulip mania , in March 1637 , some single tulip bulbs sold for more than 10 times the annual income of a skilled craftsman . It is generally considered the first recorded speculative bubble ( or economic bubble ) , although some researchers have noted that the <unk> und <unk> episode in 1619 – 22 , a Europe @-@ wide chain of debasement of the metal content of coins to fund warfare , featured mania @-@ like similarities to a bubble . The term " tulip mania " is now often used metaphorically to refer to any large economic bubble when asset prices deviate from intrinsic values . 
 The 1637 event was popularized in 1841 by the book Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds , written by British journalist Charles Mackay . According to Mackay , at one point 12 acres ( 5 ha ) of land were offered for a Semper Augustus bulb . Mackay claims that many such investors were ruined by the fall in prices , and Dutch commerce suffered a severe shock . Although Mackay 's book is a classic , his account is contested . Many modern scholars feel that the mania was not as extraordinary as Mackay described and argue that not enough price data are available to prove that a tulip bulb bubble actually occurred . 
 Research is difficult because of the limited economic data from the 1630s — much of which come from biased and very speculative sources . Some modern economists have proposed rational explanations , rather than a speculative mania , for the rise and fall in prices . For example , other flowers , such as the hyacinth , also had high initial prices at the time of their introduction , which immediately fell . The high asset prices may also have been driven by expectations of a parliamentary decree that contracts could be voided for a small cost — thus lowering the risk to buyers . 
 = = History = = 
 The introduction of the tulip to Europe is usually attributed to Ogier de Busbecq , the ambassador of Ferdinand I , Holy Roman Emperor to the Sultan of Turkey , who sent the first tulip bulbs and seeds to Vienna in 1554 from the Ottoman Empire . Tulip bulbs were soon distributed from Vienna to Augsburg , Antwerp and Amsterdam . Its popularity and cultivation in the United Provinces ( now the Netherlands ) is generally thought to have started in earnest around 1593 after the Flemish botanist Carolus Clusius had taken up a post at the University of Leiden and established the hortus <unk> . He planted his collection of tulip bulbs and found they were able to tolerate the harsher conditions of the Low Countries ; shortly thereafter the tulip began to grow in popularity . 
 The tulip was different from every other flower known to Europe at that time , with a saturated intense petal color that no other plant had . The appearance of the nonpareil tulip as a status symbol at this time coincides with the rise of newly independent Holland 's trade fortunes . No longer the Spanish Netherlands , its economic resources could now be channeled into commerce and the country embarked on its Golden Age . Amsterdam merchants were at the center of the lucrative East Indies trade , where one voyage could yield profits of 400 % . The new merchant class displayed and validated its success , primarily by setting up grand estates surrounded by flower gardens , and the plant that had pride of place was the sensational tulip . 
 As a result , tulips rapidly became a coveted luxury item , and a profusion of varieties followed . They were classified in groups : the single @-@ hued tulips of red , yellow , or white were known as <unk> ; the multicolored Rosen ( white streaks on a red or pink background ) ; <unk> ( white streaks on a purple or lilac background ) ; and the rarest of all , the <unk> ( <unk> ) , ( yellow or white streaks on a red , brown or purple background ) . The multicolor effects of intricate lines and flame @-@ like streaks on the petals were vivid and spectacular and made the bulbs that produced these even more exotic @-@ looking plants highly sought @-@ after . It is now known that this effect is due to the bulbs being infected with a type of tulip @-@ specific mosaic virus , known as the " Tulip breaking virus " , so called because it " breaks " the one petal color into two or more . 
 The biology of the tulip was itself a contributor to the supply @-@ squeeze that fueled the speculation , in that it is grown from a bulb that cannot be produced quickly . Normally it takes 7 – 12 years to grow a flowering bulb from seed ; bulbs can produce both seeds and two or three bud clones , or offsets , annually , but the " mother bulb " lasts only a few years . Properly cultivated , the " daughter offsets " will become flowering bulbs after one to three years . Before the demand for the " broken " tulips , virus @-@ free bulbs producing ordinary single @-@ color varieties were sold by the pound . Once affected by the virus , the " broken " exotics were an extremely limited commodity because the sought @-@ after " breaking pattern " can only be reproduced through offsets , not seeds , as only the bulb is affected by the mosaic virus . Unfortunately , the virus that produced the sought @-@ after effects also acted adversely on the bulb , weakening it and retarding propagation of offsets , so cultivating the most appealing varieties now took even longer . Taking this into account , quite probably from the time the speculation started until its collapse , the number of rare bulbs that changed hands so feverishly never increased beyond the original number . 
 The beautiful effects of the virus made the flamboyant and extravagant plants highly coveted , and because they were rare and desirable , they were expensive . Given that , it is not surprising growers named their new varieties with exalted titles . Many early forms were prefixed <unk> ( " admiral " ) , often combined with the growers ' names : <unk> van der <unk> for example , was perhaps the most highly regarded of about fifty so named . <unk> ( " general " ) was another prefix used for around thirty varieties . Later varieties were given even more extravagant names , derived from Alexander the Great or Scipio , or even " Admiral of Admirals " and " General of Generals " . However , naming could be haphazard and varieties highly variable in quality . Most of these varieties have now died out , though virus @-@ free variegated @-@ bred tulips continue in the trade . 
 In the Northern Hemisphere , tulips bloom in April and May for about one week . During the plant 's dormant phase from ( Northern Hemisphere ) June to September , bulbs can be uprooted and moved about , so actual purchases ( in the spot market ) occurred during these months . During the rest of the year , florists , or tulip traders , signed contracts before a notary to buy tulips at the end of the season ( effectively futures contracts ) . Thus the Dutch , who developed many of the techniques of modern finance , created a market for tulip bulbs , which were durable goods . Short selling was banned by an edict of 1610 , which was reiterated or strengthened in 1621 and 1630 , and again in 1636 . Short sellers were not prosecuted under these edicts , but their contracts were deemed unenforceable . 
 As the flowers grew in popularity , professional growers paid higher and higher prices for bulbs with the virus , and prices rose steadily . By 1634 , in part as a result of demand from the French , speculators began to enter the market . The contract price of rare bulbs continued to rise throughout 1636 , but by November , the price of common , " unbroken " bulbs also began to increase , so that soon any tulip bulb could fetch hundreds of guilders . That year the Dutch created a type of formal futures market where contracts to buy bulbs at the end of the season were bought and sold . Traders met in " colleges " at taverns and buyers were required to pay a 2 @.@ 5 % " wine money " fee , up to a maximum of three guilders per trade . Neither party paid an initial margin nor a mark @-@ to @-@ market margin , and all contracts were with the individual counter @-@ parties rather than with the Exchange . The Dutch described tulip contract trading as <unk> ( literally " wind trade " ) , because no bulbs were actually changing hands . The entire business was accomplished on the margins of Dutch economic life , not in the Exchange itself . 
 By 1636 the tulip bulb became the fourth leading export product of the Netherlands , after gin , herrings and cheese . The price of tulips skyrocketed because of speculation in tulip futures among people who never saw the bulbs . Many men made and lost fortunes overnight . 
 Tulip mania reached its peak during the winter of 1636 – 37 , when some bulbs were reportedly changing hands ten times in a day . No deliveries were ever made to fulfil any of these contracts , because in February 1637 , tulip bulb contract prices collapsed abruptly and the trade of tulips ground to a halt . The collapse began in Haarlem , when , for the first time , buyers apparently refused to show up at a routine bulb auction . This may have been because Haarlem was then at the height of an outbreak of bubonic plague . While the existence of the plague may have helped create a culture of fatalistic risk @-@ taking that allowed the speculation to skyrocket in the first place , this outbreak might also have helped to burst the bubble . 
 = = Available price data = = 
 The lack of consistently recorded price data from the 1630s makes the extent of the tulip mania difficult to estimate . The bulk of available data comes from anti @-@ speculative pamphlets by " <unk> and <unk> " ( GW ) written just after the bubble . Economist Peter Garber collected data on the sales of 161 bulbs of 39 varieties between 1633 and 1637 , with 53 being recorded by GW . Ninety @-@ eight sales were recorded for the last date of the bubble , 5 February 1637 , at wildly varying prices . The sales were made using several market mechanisms : futures trading at the colleges , spot sales by growers , notarized futures sales by growers , and estate sales . " To a great extent , the available price data are a blend of apples and oranges " , according to Garber . 
 = = Mackay 's Madness of Crowds = = 
 The modern discussion of tulip mania began with the book Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds , published in 1841 by the Scottish journalist Charles Mackay ; he proposed that crowds of people often behave irrationally , and tulip mania was , along with the South Sea Bubble and the Mississippi Company scheme , one of his primary examples . His account was largely sourced from a 1797 work by Johann Beckmann titled A History of Inventions , Discoveries , and Origins . In fact , Beckmann 's account , and thus Mackay 's by derivation , was primarily sourced to three anonymous pamphlets published in 1637 with an anti @-@ speculative agenda . Mackay 's vivid book was popular among generations of economists and stock market participants . His popular but flawed description of tulip mania as a speculative bubble remains prominent , even though since the 1980s economists have debunked many aspects of his account . 
 According to Mackay , the growing popularity of tulips in the early 17th century caught the attention of the entire nation ; " the population , even to its lowest dregs , embarked in the tulip trade " . By 1635 , a sale of 40 bulbs for 100 @,@ 000 florins ( also known as Dutch guilders ) was recorded . By way of comparison , a ton of butter cost around 100 florins , a skilled laborer might earn 150 florins a year , and " eight fat swine " cost 240 florins . ( According to the International Institute of Social History , one florin had the purchasing power of € 10 @.@ 28 in 2002 . ) 
 By 1636 tulips were traded on the exchanges of numerous Dutch towns and cities . This encouraged trading in tulips by all members of society ; Mackay recounted people selling or trading their other possessions in order to speculate in the tulip market , such as an offer of 12 acres ( 49 @,@ 000 m2 ) of land for one of two existing Semper Augustus bulbs , or a single bulb of the Viceroy that was purchased for a basket of goods ( shown in table ) worth 2 @,@ 500 florins . 
 Many individuals grew suddenly rich . A golden bait hung <unk> out before the people , and , one after the other , they rushed to the tulip <unk> , like flies around a honey @-@ pot . Every one imagined that the passion for tulips would last for ever , and that the wealthy from every part of the world would send to Holland , and pay whatever prices were asked for them . The riches of Europe would be concentrated on the shores of the <unk> Zee , and poverty banished from the favoured clime of Holland . Nobles , citizens , farmers , mechanics , seamen , footmen , maidservants , even chimney sweeps and old <unk> , dabbled in tulips . 
 The increasing mania contributed several amusing , but unlikely , anecdotes that Mackay recounted , such as a sailor who mistook the valuable tulip bulb of a merchant for an onion and grabbed it to eat . The merchant and his family chased the sailor to find him " eating a breakfast whose cost might have regaled a whole ship 's crew for a <unk> " . The sailor was jailed for eating the bulb . Tulips are poisonous if prepared incorrectly , taste bad , and are considered to be only marginally edible even during famines . 
 People were purchasing bulbs at higher and higher prices , intending to re @-@ sell them for a profit . However , such a scheme could not last unless someone was ultimately willing to pay such high prices and take possession of the bulbs . In February 1637 , tulip traders could no longer find new buyers willing to pay increasingly inflated prices for their bulbs . As this realization set in , the demand for tulips collapsed , and prices plummeted — the speculative bubble burst . Some were left holding contracts to purchase tulips at prices now ten times greater than those on the open market , while others found themselves in possession of bulbs now worth a fraction of the price they had paid . Mackay claims the Dutch devolved into distressed accusations and recriminations against others in the trade . 
 In Mackay 's account , the panicked tulip speculators sought help from the government of the Netherlands , which responded by declaring that anyone who had bought contracts to purchase bulbs in the future could void their contract by payment of a 10 percent fee . Attempts were made to resolve the situation to the satisfaction of all parties , but these were unsuccessful . The mania finally ended , Mackay says , with individuals stuck with the bulbs they held at the end of the crash — no court would enforce payment of a contract , since judges regarded the debts as contracted through gambling , and thus not enforceable by law . 
 According to Mackay , lesser tulip manias also occurred in other parts of Europe , although matters never reached the state they had in the Netherlands . He also claimed that the aftermath of the tulip price deflation led to a widespread economic chill throughout the Netherlands for many years afterwards . 
 = = Modern views = = 
 Mackay 's account of inexplicable mania was unchallenged , and mostly unexamined , until the 1980s . However , research into tulip mania since then , especially by proponents of the efficient @-@ market hypothesis , suggests that his story was incomplete and inaccurate . In her 2007 scholarly analysis <unk> , Anne Goldgar states that the phenomenon was limited to " a fairly small group " , and that most accounts from the period " are based on one or two contemporary pieces of propaganda and a prodigious amount of plagiarism " . Peter Garber argues that the bubble " was no more than a meaningless winter drinking game , played by a plague @-@ ridden population that made use of the vibrant tulip market . " 
 While Mackay 's account held that a wide array of society was involved in the tulip trade , Goldgar 's study of archived contracts found that even at its peak the trade in tulips was conducted almost exclusively by merchants and skilled craftsmen who were wealthy , but not members of the nobility . Any economic fallout from the bubble was very limited . Goldgar , who identified many prominent buyers and sellers in the market , found fewer than half a dozen who experienced financial troubles in the time period , and even of these cases it is not clear that tulips were to blame . This is not altogether surprising . Although prices had risen , money had not changed hands between buyers and sellers . Thus profits were never realized for sellers ; unless sellers had made other purchases on credit in expectation of the profits , the collapse in prices did not cause anyone to lose money . 
 = = = Rational explanations = = = 
 There is no dispute that prices for tulip bulb contracts rose and then fell in 1636 – 37 , but even a dramatic rise and fall in prices does not necessarily mean that an economic or speculative bubble developed and then burst . For tulip mania to have qualified as an economic bubble , the price of tulip bulbs would need to have become unhinged from the intrinsic value of the bulbs . Modern economists have advanced several possible reasons for why the rise and fall in prices may not have constituted a bubble . 
 The increases of the 1630s corresponded with a lull in the Thirty Years ' War . Hence market prices ( at least initially ) were responding rationally to a rise in demand . However , the fall in prices was faster and more dramatic than the rise . Data on sales largely disappeared after the February 1637 collapse in prices , but a few other data points on bulb prices after tulip mania show that bulbs continued to lose value for decades thereafter . 
 = = = Natural volatility in flower prices = = = 
 Garber compared the available price data on tulips to hyacinth prices at the beginning of the 19th century — when the hyacinth replaced the tulip as the fashionable flower — and found a similar pattern . When hyacinths were introduced florists strove with one another to grow beautiful hyacinth flowers , as demand was strong . However , as people became more accustomed to hyacinths the prices began to fall . The most expensive bulbs fell to 1 to 2 percent of their peak value within 30 years . Garber also notes that , " a small quantity of prototype lily bulbs recently was sold for 1 million guilders ( $ <unk> at 1987 exchange rates ) " , demonstrating that even in the modern world , flowers can command extremely high prices . Additionally , because the rise in prices occurred after bulbs were planted for the year , growers would not have had an opportunity to increase production in response to price . 
 = = = = Critiques = = = = 
 Other economists believe that these elements cannot completely explain the dramatic rise and fall in tulip prices . Garber 's theory has also been challenged for failing to explain a similar dramatic rise and fall in prices for regular tulip bulb contracts . Some economists also point to other factors associated with speculative bubbles , such as a growth in the supply of money , demonstrated by an increase in deposits at the Bank of Amsterdam during that period . 
 = = = Legal changes = = = 
 UCLA economics professor Earl A. Thompson argues in a 2007 paper that Garber 's explanation cannot account for the extremely swift drop in tulip bulb contract prices . The annualized rate of price decline was 99 @.@ 999 % , instead of the average 40 % for other flowers . He provides another explanation for Dutch tulip mania . The Dutch parliament was considering a decree ( originally sponsored by Dutch tulip investors who had lost money because of a German setback in the Thirty Years ' War ) that changed the way tulip contracts functioned : 
 On February 24 , 1637 , the self @-@ regulating guild of Dutch florists , in a decision that was later ratified by the Dutch Parliament , announced that all futures contracts written after November 30 , 1636 and before the re @-@ opening of the cash market in the early Spring , were to be interpreted as option contracts . They did this by simply relieving the futures buyers of the obligation to buy the future tulips , forcing them merely to compensate the sellers with a small fixed percentage of the contract price . 
 Before this parliamentary decree , the purchaser of a tulip contract — known in modern finance as a futures contract — was legally obliged to buy the bulbs . The decree changed the nature of these contracts , so that if the current market price fell , the purchaser could opt to pay a penalty and forgo receipt of the bulb , rather than pay the full contracted price . This change in law meant that , in modern terminology , the futures contracts had been transformed into options contracts . This proposal began to be debated in the fall of 1636 , and if it became clear to investors that the decree was likely to be enacted , prices probably would have risen . 
 This decree allowed someone who purchased a contract to void the contract with a payment of only 3 @.@ 5 percent of the contract price ( or about 1 / 30th the contract ) . Thus , investors bought increasingly expensive contracts . A speculator could sign a contract to purchase a tulip for 100 guilders . If the price rose above 100 guilders , the speculator would pocket the difference as profit . If the price remained low , the speculator could void the contract for only 3 ½ guilders . Thus , a contract nominally for 100 guilders , would actually cost an investor no more than 3 ½ guilders . In early February , as contract prices reached a peak , Dutch authorities stepped in and halted the trading of these contracts . 
 Thompson states that actual sales of tulip bulbs remained at ordinary levels throughout the period . Thus , Thompson concludes that the " mania " was a rational response to changes in contractual obligations . Using data about the specific payoffs present in the futures and option contracts , Thompson argues that tulip bulb contract prices hewed closely to what a rational economic model would dictate , " Tulip contract prices before , during , and after the ' <unk> ' appear to provide a remarkable illustration of ' market efficiency ' . " 
 = = Social mania and legacy = = 
 The popularity of Mackay 's tale has continued to this day , with new editions of Extraordinary Popular Delusions appearing regularly , with introductions by writers such as financier Bernard Baruch ( 1932 ) , financial writer Andrew Tobias ( 1980 ) , psychologist David J. Schneider ( 1993 ) , and Michael Lewis ( 2008 ) . At least six editions are currently in print . 
 Goldgar argues that although tulip mania may not have constituted an economic or speculative bubble , it was nonetheless traumatic to the Dutch for other reasons . " Even though the financial crisis affected very few , the shock of <unk> was considerable . A whole network of values was thrown into doubt . " In the 17th century , it was unimaginable to most people that something as common as a flower could be worth so much more money than most people earned in a year . The idea that the prices of flowers that grow only in the summer could fluctuate so wildly in the winter , threw into chaos the very understanding of " value " . 
 Many of the sources telling of the woes of tulip mania , such as the anti @-@ speculative pamphlets that were later reported by Beckmann and Mackay , have been cited as evidence of the extent of the economic damage . These pamphlets , however , were not written by victims of a bubble , but were primarily religiously motivated . The upheaval was viewed as a perversion of the moral order — proof that " concentration on the earthly , rather than the heavenly flower could have dire consequences " . Thus , it is possible that a relatively minor economic event took on a life of its own as a morality tale . 
 Nearly a century later , during the crash of the Mississippi Company and the South Sea Company in about 1720 , tulip mania appeared in satires of these manias . When Johann Beckmann first described tulip mania in the 1780s , he compared it to the failing lotteries of the time . In Goldgar 's view , even many modern popular works about financial markets , such as Burton Malkiel 's A Random Walk Down Wall Street ( 1973 ) and John Kenneth Galbraith 's A Short History of Financial Euphoria ( 1990 ; written soon after the crash of 1987 ) , used the tulip mania as a lesson in morality . Tulip mania again became a popular reference during the dot @-@ com bubble of 1995 – 2001 . 
 In the 21st century , journalists have compared it to failure of the speculative dot @-@ com bubble and the subprime mortgage crisis . In November 2013 <unk> <unk> , former president of the Dutch Central Bank , described <unk> as " worse than the tulip mania , " adding , " At least then you got a tulip , now you get nothing . " 
 Despite the mania 's enduring popularity , Daniel Gross of Slate has said of economists offering efficient @-@ market explanations for the mania , that " If they 're correct ... then business writers will have to delete <unk> from their handy @-@ pack of bubble analogies . " 
 = Cardcaptor Sakura = 
 Cardcaptor Sakura ( <unk> , <unk> Sakura ) , abbreviated as CCS and also known as Cardcaptors , is a Japanese shōjo manga series written and illustrated by the manga group Clamp . The manga was originally serialized in Nakayoshi from May 1996 to June 2000 , and published in 12 tankōbon volumes by Kodansha from November 1996 to July 2000 . The story focuses on Sakura Kinomoto , an elementary school student who discovers that she possesses magical powers after accidentally freeing a set of magical cards from the book they had been sealed in for years . She is then tasked with retrieving those cards in order to avoid an unknown catastrophe from <unk> the world . A sequel by Clamp focusing on Sakura in junior high school began serialization in Nakayoshi with the July 2016 issue . 
 The series was adapted into a 70 @-@ episode anime TV series by Madhouse that aired on Japan 's satellite television channel NHK <unk> from April 1998 to March 2000 . Additional media produced include two anime films , as well as video games , art books , picture books , and film comics . Tokyopop initially released the manga in English in North America from March 2000 to August 2003 . After Tokyopop 's license for Cardcaptor Sakura expired , Dark Horse Manga acquired the license and released the series in omnibus editions from October 2010 to September 2012 . 
 Nelvana licensed the TV series and first film for North American broadcast and distribution , renaming it Cardcaptors , which first aired on Kids ' WB from June 2000 to December 2001 . All 70 episodes were dubbed ; while other English @-@ speaking territories received the full run , the version aired on American television was heavily edited into 39 episodes . Cardcaptors also aired on Cartoon Network , Teletoon and Nickelodeon . The TV series and films were sub @-@ licensed by Geneon , which released them unedited with English subtitles . The TV series was also later released by Madman Entertainment in Australia and New Zealand . 
 Critics praised the manga for its creativity and described it as a quintessential shōjo manga , as well as a critical work for manga in general . The manga series was awarded the Seiun Award for Best Manga in 2001 . The TV anime adaptation was praised for transcending its target audience of young children and being enjoyable to older viewers . The artwork in the anime was also a focus of attention , described as above average for a late @-@ 1990s TV series , and Sakura 's magic @-@ casting scenes were complimented for being nearly unique because of the regular costume changes . The TV anime won the Animage Grand Prix award for Best Anime in 1999 . The American edit of Cardcaptors , however , was heavily panned by critics for cutting out character backgrounds essential to understanding the plot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Cardcaptor Sakura takes place in the fictional Japanese city of Tomoeda , which is somewhere near Tokyo . Ten @-@ year @-@ old Sakura Kinomoto accidentally releases a set of magical cards known as Clow Cards from a book in her basement created and named after the sorcerer Clow Reed . Each card has its own unique ability and can assume an alternate form when activated . The guardian of the cards , Cerberus , emerges from the book and chooses Sakura to retrieve the missing cards . As she finds each card , she battles its magical personification and defeats it by sealing it away . Cerberus acts as her guide , while her best friend and second cousin , Tomoyo <unk> films her exploits and provides her with battle costumes . Sakura 's older brother Toya Kinomoto watches over her , while pretending that he is unaware of what is going on . 
 Syaoran Li , a boy Sakura 's age and descendant of Clow Reed , arrives from Hong Kong to recapture the cards himself . While initially antagonistic , he comes to respect Sakura and begins aiding her to capture the cards . Once Sakura captures all of the cards , she is tested by Yue the judge , the cards ' second guardian , to determine if she is worthy of becoming the cards ' true master ; Yue is also the true form of Yukito <unk> , Toya 's best friend . Aided by her teacher Kaho Mizuki , Sakura passes the test and becomes the new master of the Clow Cards . Eriol <unk> , a transfer student from England , arrives in Tomoeda and begins causing disturbances with two guardian @-@ like creatures , <unk> Sun and Ruby Moon . Sakura is suddenly unable to use the Clow Cards and transforms her wand , beginning the process of evolving the cards into Sakura Cards as Eriol causes strange occurrences that forces her to use and thus transform certain cards . Once all the cards have been transformed , Eriol tells Sakura that he aided her in converting the cards so they would not lose their magic powers . Syaoran later confesses his love to Sakura , who comes to realize she also loves him . Cardcaptor Sakura concludes with Syaoran returning to Hong Kong with a promise to return . Two years later , Syaoran moves back to Tomoeda permanently . 
 The plot of the anime series is extended , featuring 52 Clow Cards from the manga 's original 19 , and certain scenes are stretched and delayed , such as Cerberus ' true form not being revealed until just before Yue 's appearance . Sakura creates a 53rd card , Hope , a talent she is not shown to have in the manga . Some of the circumstances around the capturing of the cards is changed , such as Syaoran capturing several cards himself and being tested by Yue in the Final Judgment . Syaoran 's cousin and fiancée <unk> Li is introduced in the anime , who positions herself as a romantic rival for Sakura later in the series and also a friend until she returns to Hong Kong . The TV series leaves the relationship between Sakura and Syaoran unresolved , but Sakura confesses her love to Syaoran at the end of the second anime film . 
 = = Production = = 
 Cardcaptor Sakura was first conceived shortly before the conclusion of Clamp 's Magic Knight Rayearth , which was serialized in Nakayoshi . Clamp 's head editor <unk> asked them to do another series in Nakayoshi , and Clamp decided to make a " Nakayoshi @-@ esque " series , as opposed to Rayearth , which Clamp described as unlike anything they had done before . Head Clamp writer Nanase Ohkawa 's first impulse was to create a magical girl series , despite not being well @-@ versed in the genre . Ohkawa wanted the heroine Sakura to be in the same age group as the majority of Nakayoshi 's readers so that fans could relate to her . Due to it being different from how Clamp normally conceived characters , Ohkawa designed the other characters such as Tomoyo and Cerberus to be more like Clamp 's previous creations . Once Ohkawa had enough information on the characters , she had the three artists in Clamp — Mokona , Tsubaki Nekoi and Satsuki Igarashi — design them based on her descriptions . When designing Cerberus , Ohkawa wanted a mascot @-@ type companion for Sakura , but Nekoi tried various forms , including dogs and squirrels , before designing the final version . Syaoran and Toya were conceived to be a common type of character featured in Clamp 's works . 
 Various other titles were suggested for the series such as <unk> Sakura and Card Character Sakura before Nekoi suggested Cardcaptor Sakura . While Ohkawa planned out Cardcaptor Sakura from beginning to end , she never consulted the plot with the other members , instead giving them the script one chapter at a time . Mokona initially drew Tomoyo so it would look like she was in love with Toya , which led to her surprise when she received the script for the chapter which reveals Tomoyo loves Sakura . The story was planned to have the theme of " if you try your best , it 'll work out " , but Ohkawa did not start out with Sakura 's " It 'll definitely be okay " mindset . Ohkawa wanted to write a story that " minorities would feel comfortable with , " referring to the same @-@ sex and taboo relationships featured in the manga . The series ' main theme is expressed through Sakura , a main character designed to be open minded about different family structures and kinds of love . Ohkawa addressed the relationships featured in the series by using Tomoyo and Sakura as an example . She explained that the reason Tomoyo and Sakura did not end up together was not because Tomoyo is a girl , but rather because Sakura did not love Tomoyo in a romantic way . 
 The central theme of Cardcaptor Sakura is love and human relationships . Throughout the series , many forms of love are showcased , including " sibling love , childhood crushes , unrequited love , [ and ] true love . " At times , Clamp even ignores the Clow Cards for several chapters to focus more on the relationships of Sakura and those around her . Each of these relationships are presented as is , with Clamp carefully avoiding passing judgment on the correctness of the relationships . In particular , the romantic relationship between elementary student Rika Sasaki and her teacher Yoshiyuki Terada is presented in such a way that it can be seen as a sweet and innocent tale of " wish fulfillment " , or if examined more seriously , as a mildly disturbing story of pedophilic love . 
 The artists , especially Mokona , were told by Ohkawa to use thin lines and to try to express things through curved lines as opposed to straight lines . The style of artwork was decided at the beginning to unify the world view of Cardcaptor Sakura . Ohkawa wanted the series to have a " soft , cute @-@ like " feel , so she asked the artists to not use a lot of ink and to make the pages light . For the multitude of flower imagery used in the manga , Nekoi looked through various books to find appropriate flowers , and tried to avoid using the same flower more than once in one chapter . Igarashi remarked that they " never had to draw so many flowers for one series , " but they made a point to not use roses . Clamp wanted to incorporate transformation scenes into Cardcaptor Sakura , but because many magical girl manga have the girls wearing the same outfit , Clamp wanted Sakura to wear different costumes . Clamp felt that " it 's pretty sad for a girl to wear the same outfit all the time . " 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Cardcaptor Sakura began as a manga series written and illustrated by the manga artist group Clamp . It was serialized in the monthly shōjo ( aimed at young girls ) manga magazine Nakayoshi from the May 1996 to June 2000 issue . The individual chapters were collected and published in 12 tankōbon volumes by Kodansha from November 1996 to July 2000 . Kodansha released the first six volumes in bilingual editions that included both Japanese and English from May 2000 to July 2001 . The bilingual volumes were part of an experimental line for helping Japanese children learn English . Kodansha stopped releasing the bilingual editions after the series was licensed in English for distribution in North America by Tokyopop . A sequel manga series titled Cardcaptor Sakura : Clear Card Edition ( <unk> , <unk> Sakura <unk> <unk> @-@ hen ) began serialization in Nakayoshi from the July 2016 issue sold on June 3 . This sequel follows Sakura in junior high school and introduces the mysterious " clearing " of the Sakura Cards . 
 Tokyopop released the volumes of Cardcaptor Sakura from March 2000 to August 2003 . Tokyopop initially released the first six volumes with the book " flipped " from the original Japanese orientation , in which the book is read from right @-@ to @-@ left , to the Western format with text oriented from left @-@ to @-@ right . These volumes were later re @-@ released with the original orientation in two box sets , each containing three volumes . Volumes seven through twelve were released in the original orientation with the subtitle Master of the Clow . Madman Entertainment used Tokyopop 's English translation to release the series in Australia and New Zealand . Dark Horse Manga published an English edition of the series in four omnibus volumes containing three of the original volumes each from October 2010 and September 2012 . The manga series is licensed for additional regional language releases by Pika Édition in France , Star Comics in Italy , Egmont Manga & Anime in Germany , Editora JBC in Brazil , Ever Glory Publishing in Taiwan , Ediciones Glénat in Spain , Editorial Ivrea in Argentina , and Editorial <unk> in Mexico . 
 = = = TV series = = = 
 A 70 @-@ episode anime TV series adaptation produced by the animation studio Madhouse aired in Japan on the NHK television network spread over three seasons . The first season , consisting of 35 episodes , aired between April 7 and December 29 , 1998 . The second season , with 11 episodes , aired between April 6 and June 22 , 1999 . The third season , containing 24 episodes , aired between September 7 , 1999 and March 21 , 2000 . Directed by Morio Asaka , Clamp was fully involved in the project , with head writer Nanase Ohkawa writing and composing the screenplay and Mokona overseeing the costumes and card designs . The series was later released by Bandai Visual to 18 VHS , LD and DVD compilation volumes from September 1998 to May 2000 . 
 Nelvana licensed Cardcaptor Sakura in North America , dubbed the series into English with Ocean Studios featuring Carly McKillip as Sakura , and released it under the name Cardcaptors . This version was heavily edited from the original Japanese version . The initial version of the dub covered all 70 episodes , although character names were changed , some Japanese text was changed to English , and controversial subjects such as same @-@ sex relationships were edited out . The musical score was completely replaced with new music and some of the sound effects were replaced when they could not be separated into separate tracks , although the original opening and ending themes were dubbed into English . This version aired in Australia on Network Ten and Cartoon Network , in Ireland on RTÉ Network 2 , in the UK on <unk> and Nickelodeon , and in Canada on Teletoon ( which also aired the episodes with a French dub ) . An alternative English dub of the series was produced by Omni Productions to air on Animax Asia and it has been shown entirely unedited and uncut making it very faithfully closer to the original Japanese version , which it broadcast on its English @-@ language networks in Southeast Asia and South Asia . 
 Cardcaptors first aired in the United States on Kids ' WB between June 17 , 2000 and December 14 , 2001 . The version that aired on Kids WB was an alternate version of the Nelvana dub that was heavily edited even further with episodes re @-@ ordered and some left out completely . The editing to the original Nelvana dub was done to refocus the series to be more action oriented for the appeal of male viewers , as they were seen as the largest audience of animation at the time . The first episode aired in Kids ' WB 's version was " Sakura 's Rival " , the eighth episode of the series , having removed episodes focusing on Sakura and to have the show start with Syaoran 's arrival . The series ran for 39 episodes , changing the original episode order but finishing with the show 's actual final episode . 
 Pioneer Entertainment released the dubbed Cardcaptors episodes to nine VHS and DVD compilation volumes from November 2000 to July 2002 . They also released the unedited Cardcaptor Sakura series with the original Japanese audio tracks and English subtitles , to 18 DVDs from November 2000 to November 2003 ; the first 11 volumes were also released in VHS . The Cardcaptor Sakura TV series DVDs went out @-@ of @-@ print at the end of 2006 when the license expired . NIS America has licensed the Cardcaptor Sakura TV series and re @-@ released the entire series with Japanese and an unedited English audio track on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on August 5 , 2014 . 
 Madman Entertainment licensed the original Cardcaptor Sakura episodes in its uncut form with Japanese audio and English subtitles in Australia and New Zealand , and later released the series in two DVD box collections , one consisting of season one and the other consisting of seasons two and three . Each DVD box set contained the textless openings and endings of the series ; the second DVD box set also contained an exclusive interview with Sakura Tange , Sakura Kinomoto 's Japanese voice actress . The first DVD box collection was released in September 2012 , and the second DVD box collection was released in November 2012 . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Madhouse produced two , 82 @-@ minute anime films as an extension to the TV anime series . The first , Cardcaptor Sakura : The Movie , was released on August 21 , 1999 . Set between the first and second seasons of the TV series , the film shows Sakura and her friends going to Hong Kong where they encounter a vengeful spirit who was hurt by Clow Reed in the past . It was released to VHS , LD and DVD in Japan by Bandai Visual in February 2000 . Nelvana released an English dubbed version of the film , retaining the same name and story changes as its main Cardcaptors dub , although it was dubbed with no visual edits and was released in cut and uncut versions . As with the TV series , Pioneer Entertainment also released the film with the original Japanese audio and English subtitles , and also released a bilingual DVD containing both audio tracks . Both the edited and unedited versions were released on VHS and DVD in March 2002 . Discotek Media released the first film on Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD on September 30 , 2014 in North America . 
 The second film , Cardcaptor Sakura Movie 2 : The Sealed Card , was released in Japan on July 15 , 2000 . It provided a conclusion to the TV series , in which Syaoran returns to Tokyo in hopes of getting Sakura 's answer to his love confession , but her own confession is interrupted by the appearance of a 53rd Clow Card . It was released to LD ( as a limited edition ) and DVD in January 2001 , and to VHS in July 2001 . It was released in North America to DVD by Pioneer in November 2003 and featured an English dub by Bang Zoom ! Entertainment instead of Nelvana and Ocean Studios , now with Kari Wahlgren as Sakura , and this time retaining the original character names and the content unedited and uncut . The films as released by Pioneer ( later renamed Geneon ) remained in print in North America until late 2007 . A bonus short film titled Leave it to Kero ! was played with the theatrical screening of the second film . 
 = = = Audio CDs = = = 
 As a preview to the anime series , Kodansha released a tankōbon @-@ sized CD volume titled CD Comic Cardcaptor Sakura in August 1997 containing two character songs sung by the voice actors of Sakura and Tomoyo and drama tracks . Two drama CDs were released for the series . The first , Sakura to <unk> @-@ san no Organ , was released in July 1998 featuring a script written by Clamp author Nanase Ohkawa . It depicts Sakura having a dream about her mother playing an organ and choosing to write about her the following day for a school project . The second CD , Sweet Valentine Stories , was released in February 1999 and depicts a single day in the life of the girls in Sakura 's class , including Sakura herself . Four original soundtrack CD albums were released for the anime TV series from July 1998 to March 2000 . The soundtracks included instrumental background music and the vocal theme songs . Two soundtracks were produced for the films : the first film 's soundtrack was released in August 1999 , followed by the second film 's soundtrack in August 2000 . 
 Nine theme song singles were released : six for the TV series and three for the films . The three opening theme song singles for the TV series are : " Catch You Catch Me " by Gumi released in April 1998 , " Tobira o <unk> " by Anza released in April 1999 , and " Platinum " by Maaya Sakamoto released in October 1999 . The three ending theme song singles for the TV series are : " Groovy ! " by <unk> Hirose released in September 1998 , " Honey " by Chihiro released in May 1999 , and " Fruits Candy " by Megumi Kojima released in November 1999 . The two ending theme song singles for the films are : " <unk> Kono Machi de " by Naomi <unk> released in August 1999 for the first film , and " Ashita e no Melody " by Chaka released in July 2000 for the second film . The theme song single for the anime short Leave It To Kero ! shown with the second film , " <unk> no Uta " , was released in July 2000 . 
 Six character song singles sung by the voice actors of Sakura , Toya , Cerberus , Tomoyo , Yukito and Syaoran released in June 1998 ; each single also contained a short drama track . A character song album titled Cardcaptor Sakura Character Songbook was released in January 1999 containing tracks from the previously released character song singles as well as new tracks sung by the various voice actors . An album titled Tomoeda Elementary Choir Club Christmas Concert , released in December 1999 , contains seven tracks by a children 's choir , including five where they are joined by Junko Iwao , the voice actress for Tomoyo . A four @-@ CD compilation set , Complete Vocal Collection , was released in February 2001 compiling the series ' theme songs , tracks from the character song singles , remixes of previously released songs , and new music . An album containing the theme songs from the TV series and films titled Cardcaptor Sakura Theme Song Collection was released in December 2001 . Victor Entertainment released the albums and singles for Cardcaptor Sakura . An original soundtrack for Cardcaptors titled Cardcaptors : Songs from the Hit TV Series was released in September 2001 by Rhino Entertainment . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Ten video games have been produced based on the series and released on a variety of video game and handheld consoles . They feature various genres , such as adventure and role @-@ playing video games . 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 Kodansha published three art books for the manga series and three art books from for the anime TV series featuring art by character designer Kumiko Takahashi . The three books for the manga titled Cardcaptor Sakura Illustration Collection were released from July 1998 to December 2000 . The three for the TV series titled Cheerio ! were released from April 1999 to September 2000 . A set of the 52 Clow Cards featured in the TV series was released in August 1999 and a Clow Card Fortune Book , which contains information on how to use the Clow Card replica set as tarot cards , was released in March 2000 . 
 A fan book for the manga titled Cardcaptor Sakura Memorial Book was published on February 27 , 2001 containing various illustrations from the series , as well as information on branded merchandise based on the series and interviews . Four fan books under the title Complete Book , were released for the TV series and Films . For the TV series , two fan books labeled Clow Card @-@ hen ( <unk> , Clow Card Arc ) and Sakura Card @-@ hen ( <unk> , Sakura Card Arc ) were released in July 1999 and June 2000 respectively Each of the two films received a fan book and were released in October 1999 and October 2000 respectively . A poster box containing several posters and a T @-@ shirt was released on August 22 , 2001 . 
 Ten volumes of a film comic sharing the same name as the manga and anime series were published from August 1998 to November 2000 covering the first two anime seasons , though some episodes were skipped . Three more were published under the subtitle , Sakura Card @-@ hen from March 2001 to February 2002 covering up to episode 59 , though again some episodes were skipped . Four picture books were released for the TV series from September 1998 to November 2000 . Four sticker books were released for the TV series from August 1999 to March 2004 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Cardcaptor Sakura manga series was popular with Japanese readers , ranking among the top five sellers during its release . The manga series was awarded the Seiun Award for Best Manga in 2001 . Shaenon Garrity of The Comics Journal described the series as a quintessential shōjo manga , which is praised for its mature direction in the second half . Cardcaptor Sakura has been described as a " critical work " of manga by Christopher Butcher of <unk> . In a review by Lisa Anderson of Manga Life , the subplots in the series related to the interactions between characters were noted to be of special interest . Anderson praised how the manga , while at the onset begins with a costumed Sakura chasing after a Clow Card , takes a " rather big leap in another direction " when focusing on the characters . The manga is further lauded for its depth . Anime News Network ( ANN ) reviewer Robert Nguyen felt Cardcaptor Sakura is an " atypical shōjo " manga , which puts an " emphasis on the emotions of the character . " 
 In Manga : The Complete Guide , Mason Templar states that the series is not " just one of the best kids ' manga in translation , it 's one of the very best manga available in English , period . " He praises Clamp for their creativity and shrewd business sense , in being able to create a series that " clearly has merchandising in line " and an " utterly forgettable premise " into a story that is " brimming with warmth and joy and wonder " and is " much more than the sum of its parts . " The manga is cited as being cute by critics , and in some cases too cute ; however , Anderson stated that " much like Magic Knight Rayearth , even a cute story will have its depth and drama . " The artwork of the manga is praised for being detailed and having " beautifully drawn pictures of the Clow Cards themselves . " The cards are described as having " an artful blend of magical fantasy and reality . " 
 The anime adaptation was popular with viewers in Japan , despite having a timeslot that normally has low viewership . The Cardcaptor Sakura anime adaptation won the Animage Grand Prix award for best anime in 1999 . In May 2000 , volumes 8 and 17 of the anime LD release were among the top selling titles , with volume 17 being in first place . The 18th DVD volume was the eighth best selling anime DVD in Japan in June 2000 . Animerica contributor Kevin Lew felt the series had a " sophisticated design sense " that allowed the series to transcend its target audience of young children and be enjoyable to older viewers as well . Fellow contributor Takashi <unk> found the character Sakura to be appealing and praised the series art work . He felt that while it was " very calculated " to attract male readers , the series was attractive to fans due to Clamp 's " unique entertainment style " that incorporates " perfectly time [ d ] appearances of " fascinating villains " and the unusual element of having the main character change costume for every capture . The magazine 's Winnie Chow felt the series ' animation was " far above average for a TV series " , and compliments Sakura 's magic @-@ casting scenes for being nearly unique due to the regular costume changes . 
 Zac Bertschy of ANN praised Cardcaptor Sakura for taking an " incredibly stale and repetitive " magical girl genre and " providing something fun , clever , beautifully animated , touching and exciting all at once ; " Bertschy goes on to call the series " the best magical girl show ever produced . " The animation was described as being " incredibly fluid " with the character designs " maintain [ ing ] a consistent and impressive level of detail , even during action scenes . " The series has been described as formulaic , but this is not said to detract from the show 's enjoyment . While Cardcaptor Sakura is normally intended for an audience of young girls , the anime is lauded for containing " elements that can be enjoyed by anyone , regardless of age or gender , providing they are open @-@ minded enough . " In 2001 , the anime ranked 46th on Wizard 's Anime Magazine 's " Top 50 Anime released in North America " ranking . 
 The Kids ' WB version of the Cardcaptors dub was panned by critics . Jake <unk> of THEM Anime called it " the worst thing that has ever happened to anime that had a good Japanese name , " with the dubbing being " one of the worst if not the worst dubbing done for a program . " He also criticized the editing , saying that it had " demolished the plot " and noting that it cut out vital character backgrounds needed in order to understand the show . Adam Arnold of Animefringe , reviewing the first Cardcaptors DVD , said it was " nothing more than an attempt to dilute a fan favorite anime , " with the dubbed voices described as " not up @-@ to @-@ par with the originals . " The ordering of the episodes on the DVD was also criticized , noting that starting with episode eight meant that the cast are " left without their backgrounds fleshed out . " However , he also approved of the episode stories being left intact , and praised the voices of Carly McKillip as Sakura Avalon and Rhys Huber as Syaoran Li , stating that they were " only voices that really shine above the rest . " 
 In January 2002 , the restaurant chain Taco Bell began a month @-@ long promotion in which four Cardcaptors toys were available in their kids ' meals and the company expected to distribute up to 7 million of the toys during the month . The " conservative Christian political orientation " American Family Association complained about the promotion as the organization felt the Clow Cards in the series were too similar to tarot cards and Eastern mythology . However , the organization 's complaints did not begin until the promotion was already scheduled to end , so it is unsure whether the complaints had any actual effect . 
 = Grevillea juniperina = 
 Grevillea juniperina , commonly known as <unk> or juniper @-@ leaf grevillea or prickly spider @-@ flower , is a plant of the family Proteaceae native to eastern New South Wales and south @-@ eastern Queensland in Australia . Scottish botanist Robert Brown described the species in 1810 , and seven subspecies are recognised . It grows as a small prickly @-@ leaved shrub between 0 @.@ 2 and 3 m ( 8 in to 10 ft ) high , generally on clay @-@ based or alluvial soils in eucalypt woodland . The flower heads , known as inflorescences , appear from winter to early summer and are red , orange or yellow . Birds visit and pollinate the flowers . Grevillea juniperina regenerates after bushfire from seed . Grevillea juniperina adapts readily to cultivation and has been important in horticulture as it is the parent of many popular garden hybrids . 
 = = Description = = 
 Grevillea juniperina has a spreading or erect habit and it grows to between 0 @.@ 2 and 3 m ( 8 in to 10 ft ) in height . The branchlets are thick and sturdy . The prickly leaves are generally stiff , and are 0 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 ⁄ 4 – 1 3 ⁄ 8 in ) long and 0 @.@ 5 – 6 mm ( 1 ⁄ 32 – 1 ⁄ 4 in ) wide . They are crowded along the stems . Flowering occurs throughout the year , peaking between mid winter and early summer , though varies between subspecies . Subspecies <unk> flowers from September to February , subspecies trinervis flowers from August to December , and subspecies juniperina , <unk> , sulphurea , villosa and fortis flower in August and September . The spider @-@ flower arrangement of the inflorescence has several individual flowers emerging from a central rounded flower head — reminiscent of the legs of a spider . The flowers are red , pink , orange , yellow or greenish , and are mostly terminal — arising on the ends of stems — though they occasionally arise from axillary buds . They are 2 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 – 1 3 ⁄ 8 in ) long . The perianth is finely @-@ furred on the outside , while the pistil is smooth ; it is 1 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 7 cm ( 5 ⁄ 8 – 1 1 ⁄ 8 in ) long . Flowering is followed by the development of seed pods , each capsule is 10 – 18 mm ( 3 ⁄ 8 – 3 ⁄ 4 in ) long , and releases one or two seeds when ripe . The narrow oval seed is 7 @.@ 5 – 12 mm ( 1 ⁄ 4 – 1 ⁄ 2 in ) and 2 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 3 mm ( 1 ⁄ 16 – 1 ⁄ 8 in ) wide , with a swelling at the apex and a short wing . Both surfaces are covered with tiny hairs . 
 Similar species include Grevillea molyneuxii , which can be distinguished by its prominent midvein on the leaf undersurface , and G. speciosa , which has wider leaves with lateral veins and longer pistil . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The type specimen for this species was collected from Port Jackson area ( Sydney district ) and was described by botanist Robert Brown in 1810 , who gave it the specific epithet juniperina which alludes to its juniper @-@ like foliage . Likewise it is commonly known as <unk> or juniper @-@ leaf grevillea , as well as prickly spider @-@ flower . The lectotype was selected by Don MacGillivray in 1993 from a collection by George Caley in 1803 11 km ( 7 mi ) northwest of Prospect in what is now Sydney 's outer western suburbs . Brown placed it in the series <unk> in his 1810 work Prodromus Florae Novae Hollandiae et Insulae Van Diemen . 
 Allan Cunningham collected what he called Grevillea sulphurea in 1822 near <unk> River in the Bathurst area , where it grew alongside G. rosmarinifolia and G. arenaria subspecies canescens . This was later synonymised with G. juniperina before being recognised as a distinct subspecies . 
 George Bentham placed G. juniperina in Section <unk> in his 1870 Flora Australiensis . This section has become the <unk> group of 45 species of shrub in southeastern Australia . Within this group , G. juniperina is classified in the <unk> subgroup , five species of bird @-@ pollinated grevilleas found in eastern Australia . The others are G. molyneuxii , G. dimorpha , G. <unk> and G. speciosa . 
 There are seven subspecies , six of which have been recognised or described by Bob Makinson of the New South Wales Herbarium in 2000 : 
 G. j. <unk> Makinson – is found on the Northern Tablelands and North West Slopes in northern New South Wales , from Walcha north to Tenterfield and Stanhope and <unk> National Park in southern Queensland . It is a prostrate shrub to 30 cm ( 12 in ) high with red flowers . 
 G. j. <unk> Makinson – is a prostrate or spreading shrub with yellow or orange flowers that grows to 0 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 2 m ( 5 ⁄ 8 – 3 7 ⁄ 8 ft ) tall and 3 m ( 10 ft ) wide . It is found between Braidwood and <unk> in the Shoalhaven River catchment on the Southern Tablelands . 
 G. j. fortis Makinson – is a vigorous red @-@ flowered shrub growing to 1 – 3 m ( 3 – 10 ft ) tall that is found on rocky hills and slopes near watercourses — specifically along Ginninderra Creek , the lower reaches of the Molonglo and Cotter Rivers , and the Murrumbidgee River from Pine Island downstream to where it is joined by the Molonglo River — mostly within the ACT . 
 G. j. juniperina – endemic to western Sydney , restricted to clay soils from Blacktown west to Penrith and Marsden Park and north to Pitt Town . It is listed as a vulnerable species on Schedule 2 of the Threatened Species Conservation Act 1995 in New South Wales . Its habitat is threatened by housing development , road upgrading , inappropriate fire regimes , weed invasion , rubbish dumping and trampling either by people or cars . It grows as a spreading shrub that is 0 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 5 m ( 1 @.@ 5 – 5 ft ) high . 
 G. j. sulphurea ( <unk> ) Makinson ( formerly var. <unk> ) – is a shrub to 2 m ( 7 ft ) found in alluvial soils and riverbanks in the catchments of the Cox 's , <unk> , <unk> and Shoalhaven Rivers in the Central and Southern Tablelands , from <unk> to Berrima , as well as <unk> to <unk> State Forest in the southwestern Blue Mountains . It hybridises with G. juniperina subsp. trinervis in the southern and western Blue Mountains . 
 G. j. trinervis ( R.Br. ) Makinson ( formerly Grevillea trinervis ) – is a prickly shrub with a spreading or prostrate habit ranging from 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 2 , or rarely 2 , m ( 20 in – 7 ft ) high and yellow , orange or red flowers . It is found in the western Blue Mountains . 
 G. j. villosa Makinson – is an upright red- or yellow @-@ flowered shrub to 2 m ( 7 ft ) high found along watercourses in eucalypt forest east and northeast of Braidwood , as well as <unk> in southeastern New South Wales . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Unlike other Proteaceae , which are generally not found on clay soils , Grevillea juniperina subsp. juniperina is found in Cumberland Plain and Castlereagh Woodland communities on clay @-@ loam soils , growing alongside such species as forest <unk> ( Eucalyptus tereticornis ) , mugga ironbark ( E. sideroxylon ) , thin @-@ leaved stringybark ( E. eugenioides ) , broad @-@ leaved red ironbark ( E. fibrosa ) , grey box ( E. moluccana ) , white feather <unk> ( Melaleuca <unk> ) , <unk> ( Bursaria spinosa ) , sickle wattle ( Acacia falcata ) and Dillwynia <unk> . Grevillea juniperina subsp. sulphurea is found on gravelly alluvial soil alongside Leptospermum species , and G. juniperina subsp. trinervis is found on alluvial soil with poor drainage in woodland or along riverbanks in association with snow gum ( Eucalyptus pauciflora ) , mountain gum ( E. dalrympleana ) , Dillwynia <unk> and river <unk> ( Lomatia <unk> ) . The annual rainfall in regions where G. juniperina grows is 600 to 800 mm ( 24 – 32 in ) . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Killed by bushfire , Grevillea juniperina regenerates afterwards by seeds that germinate after lying dormant in the soil , stimulated by exposure to heat and smoke . Plants over 1 m ( 3 ft ) high produce more seed . Intervals of 10 to 15 years between fires are thought to be most beneficial for the species ' survival , as this allows seed numbers to build up in the soil over time . 
 Grevillea juniperina can also colonise disturbed areas , though overgrowth of Bursaria spinosa can negatively impact its spread . 
 Grevillea juniperina is pollinated by birds , with bees also recorded visiting flowers . The leaves are food for caterpillars of the <unk> blue ( Candalides <unk> ) . A springtail species of Australian origin — <unk> superba — was found on Grevillea juniperina cultivated at the Lost Gardens of Heligan in Cornwall . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 The botanist Allan Cunningham sent seed of G. juniperina to England in 1820 , resulting in it being grown the following year . Baron Charles von Hügel grew the species in Vienna in 1831 . It has been grown outdoors in southern England , particularly subspecies sulphurea . Grevillea juniperina adapts easily to cultivation and grows in a wide range of soils and aspects in locations with good drainage . Long @-@ flowering , it attracts birds such as honeyeaters with its nectar . The prickly dense foliage is also a good nesting site and shelter , particularly for smaller birds , such as finches . Many forms and hybrids have been commercially propagated and sold , with some of more horticultural appeal than others . Low winter temperatures promote more prolific flowering and pruning promotes dense foliage . Propagation by cutting is required to ensure the new plants have the same characteristics of the parent . Direct contact with the plant may cause a skin rash . 
 Many cultivars have been selected for horticultural use , either selected forms or hybrids with other Grevillea species . One prominent early breeder was Leo Hodge of W Tree , Victoria . Leo became interested in breeding <unk> after finding seedlings in his garden . His first trials involved crossing G. juniperina with G. victoriae , producing G. ' Poorinda Queen ' , which was the first to flower , followed by G. ' Poorinda Constance ' , G. ' Poorinda Leane ' and G. ' Poorinda Pink Coral ' respectively all in 1952 . 
 These include : 
 <unk> Radiance ' – derived from a prostrate orange and prostrate red forms of G. juniperina . 
 <unk> ' – G. juniperina crossed with G. victoriae . Bred in 1957 . 
 <unk> Gem ' – G. juniperina crossed with G. rosmarinifolia . Registered with the Australian Cultivar Registration Authority in 1976 . 
 <unk> Gold ' – <unk> yellow form of G. juniperina crossed with Grevillea parvula . 
 <unk> ' – G. juniperina crossed with Grevillea <unk> . 
 <unk> ' ( Gold Cluster ) , a dense growing prostrate selection with yellow flowers . 
 <unk> Light ' – a low @-@ growing form with variegated leaves and orange @-@ pink flowers It is suitable for rockeries . 
 <unk> ' is a form with a low spreading habit and larger orange flowers with red styles . It was bred by Rudolph Willing of Australian National University in 1964 , from two disparate forms of juniperina , an erect red @-@ flowered form from around Canberra and a yellow @-@ flowered spreading prostrate form from the western slopes of the <unk> Range in 1964 . It is named after the Molonglo River . 
 <unk> Blood ' – a compact red @-@ flowered shrub resulting from a cross of ' Molonglo ' cultivar with G. <unk> . 
 <unk> Gold ' – a low spreading shrub with yellow new growth , lobed leaves and greyish @-@ yellow flowers with pink styles . It is derived from G. juniperina crossed with Grevillea ilicifolia . 
 <unk> Box ' – G. juniperina crossed with G. victoriae . 
 <unk> Lady ' – G. juniperina crossed with G. rosmarinifolia . A shrub to 60 cm ( 2 ft ) high and 3 m ( 10 ft ) wide with pale pink flowers . 
 'Poorinda <unk> ' – seedling origin 
 'Poorinda Annette ' – a cross with the small @-@ flowered form of Grevillea alpina . 
 'Poorinda Beauty ' – a cross with Grevillea alpina . 
 'Poorinda Belinda ' – a cross with a hybrid of the yellow flower form of Grevillea <unk> and Grevillea alpina . 
 'Poorinda Constance ' – a cross with Grevillea victoriae . 
 'Poorinda Jeanie ' – a red @-@ flowering shrub that grows up to 2 m ( 7 ft ) high . It is derived from a cross with Grevillea alpina . 
 'Poorinda Leane ' – a cross with G. victoriae . It is a spreading shrub to 4 m ( 13 ft ) high with buff or apricot flowers . 
 'Poorinda Pink Coral ' – a cross with G. victoriae . 
 'Poorinda Queen ' – derived from a cross with a yellow @-@ flowered form of Grevillea victoriae . It has apricot @-@ pink flowers . 
 'Poorinda Refrain ' – a cross with Grevillea floribunda . 
 'Poorinda Rachel ' – a 1 m ( 3 ft ) high hybrid cross with Grevillea alpina , which has buff @-@ <unk> flowers , and was developed in 1965 – 66 . 
 'Poorinda Rosalie ' – a taller rose @-@ red flowered hybrid with G. victoriae , developed in 1967 – 68 . 
 'Poorinda Signet ' – a cross with Grevillea <unk> . 
 × <unk> – a hybrid of English origin derived from a cross of Grevillea juniperina var. sulphurea with Grevillea <unk> 
 = 2000 UEFA Cup semi @-@ final violence = 
 The 2000 UEFA Cup semi @-@ final violence was a series of violent incidents in Istanbul , Turkey between fans of English football team Leeds United and Turkish team Galatasaray before the first match of the UEFA Cup semi @-@ final . The violence happened on 5 April 2000 between fans of the two clubs where two Leeds fans were stabbed to death by Galatasaray fans . Four men were arrested and charged with their murders . The deaths led to an angry reaction in England with Galatasaray fans being banned from attending the second leg in England . 
 = = Background = = 
 Leeds qualified for the UEFA Cup through finishing fourth in the 1998 – 99 Premier League . They reached the semi @-@ final after defeating Partizan , Lokomotiv Moscow , Spartak Moscow , Roma and Slavia Prague . Galatasaray qualified for the UEFA Cup by finishing third in the group stage in the 1999 – 2000 UEFA Champions League . They entered the third round defeating Bologna , Borussia Dortmund and Mallorca en route to the semi @-@ final . Galatasaray had a reputation of a creating a hostile atmosphere surrounding their home matches and Leeds travelled there aiming to reach the UEFA Cup Final in order to win in their last chance of silverware of their season . 
 = = Events = = 
 The violence occurred at 21 : 00 in Istanbul 's Taksim Square during a fight between Leeds fans and Galatasaray fans the day before their UEFA Cup semi @-@ final first leg at Galatasaray 's Ali Sami Yen Stadium in Istanbul on 6 April 2000 . 
 Turkish accounts of the events stated that Leeds fans had been taunting people from local bars , which led to the Turkish police being called in to stop fights from breaking out . There were reports that a Galatasaray fan had run to a nearby telephone box to call for support when he saw Leeds fans arriving . Several Galatasaray fans , reportedly members of a gang called " The Night Watchmen " , entered the area shortly afterwards , precipitating a fight between the two sets of supporters which led to the two Leeds fans being stabbed to death . Police arrested Ali <unk> Demir and three other men for the stabbings . 
 The first moments of the fight are unclear with witness accounts of the brawl either being started by Leeds fans throwing beer glasses at Galatasaray fans and insulting the Turkish flag or being started by Galatasaray fans throwing chairs or ambushing Leeds fans with knives . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In 2002 , after an adjournment from 2001 where some of the defendants failed to appear in court , Demir was found guilty of murder and was sentenced to 15 years imprisonment which was reduced from 30 years as it was not clear who was the sole cause of the deaths . This sentence was negatively received by residents of Istanbul who said that Demir was a " patriot " . In 2005 , he was released for a retrial after a change in Turkish law and after an appeal in 2003 was successful . Eventually one of the Turkish attackers was sentenced to 10 years , while three others were sentenced to 6 years and 8 months in prison . 
 Because of the stabbings , Leeds United banned Galatasaray fans from attending the second leg at Elland Road , claiming that the safety of fans inside the stadium could not be guaranteed and asked for Galatasaray fans not to travel to England . Galatasaray in response asked for the match to be played at a neutral venue or for Leeds fans to be banned from the match as well . In the end , Galatasaray fans were banned from the match . UEFA supported the ban and only 80 tickets were issued to Galatasaray for officials and representatives of the Turkish government . This led to an angry reaction from Galatasaray 's vice @-@ president who called the decision " Disgusting " and by the Turkish State Minister who said that Leeds were trying to turn the murders into an advantage . Leeds United chairman , Peter Ridsdale , responded by claiming that Galatasaray were showing a lack of respect and said that Galatasaray should withdraw from the UEFA Cup if they did not accept the ban . 
 The day after the violence ; flowers , scarves and shirts were laid outside the Elland Road gates in tribute . The statue of former Leeds United captain Billy Bremner which was outside the stadium also had a black armband placed on it as a symbol of the club mourning . Leeds United installed a brass plaque in Elland Road to remember those who had been killed in the violence . Leeds ' Premier League match against Arsenal the Sunday before the second leg was marked by Arsenal players laying flowers at all four corners of Elland Road and a minute 's silence being held before the match started in respect for the death of the two Leeds fans . 
 Before the second leg , Ridsdale took out advertisements in British newspapers calling for calm , with the messages in the adverts also being translated into Turkish . Despite this , West Yorkshire Police warned local Turkish businesses to close early . When Galatasaray officials arrived at Elland Road for the second leg , hundreds of Leeds fans attacked the coach busses that were carrying them which delayed the kick @-@ off of the second leg . During the first minute of the match , Leeds fans turned their backs on the match in protest of , what was viewed as , a lack of justice . 
 Leeds lost the tie 4 – 2 on aggregate . On the day of the final in Copenhagen , Denmark , members of Leeds United 's hooligan firm the Leeds United Service Crew , joined members of other British hooligan firms led by Arsenal 's firm The Herd . In Copenhagen , they met up in order to enact revenge attacks on Galatasaray fans in Copenhagen 's City Hall Square . 
 The next season , Leeds drew Turkish side Beşiktaş in the UEFA Champions League . Security surrounding both matches was increased and planned several months in advance . Because of the tensions caused the stabbings in Istanbul , only 70 Beşiktaş fans travelled to Leeds . They had originally been booked onto an official Beşiktaş chartered flight , however , it was cancelled as was pre @-@ match hospitality prepared by Leeds ' directors . The flight , sponsored by Beşiktaş fans , was cancelled because only 70 out of a hoped @-@ for 500 fans wanted to go to the match . In the return leg , Beşiktaş placed Leeds fans , who had been escorted through the airport , on an alcohol @-@ free cruise around the Bosphorus Strait before being transported by bus to the BJK İnönü Stadium in Istanbul before the match . 
 The events are used by some football supporters to antagonize Leeds fans . It has been used by Sheffield Wednesday , Millwall and Manchester United fans . Manchester United fans also brought banners to Leeds matches referencing the murders or Istanbul . In 2009 , a Millwall fan was banned from The New Den for life after taunting Leeds fans about the events whilst wearing a Galatasaray shirt . Galatasaray fans used similar chants before their UEFA Champions League match in 2012 against Manchester United . 
 In 2015 , Galatasaray player Wesley Sneijder apologised after he advertised a set of knives baring his image on the eve of the 15th anniversary . 
 = The Quarrymen = 
 The Quarrymen ( also written as " the Quarry Men " ) are a British skiffle / rock and roll group , formed by John Lennon in Liverpool in 1956 , which eventually evolved into the Beatles in 1960 . Originally consisting of Lennon and several schoolfriends , the Quarrymen took their name from a line in the school song of Quarry Bank High School , which they attended . Lennon 's mother , Julia Lennon , taught her son to play the banjo and then showed Lennon and Eric Griffiths how to tune their guitars in a similar way to the banjo , and taught them simple chords and songs . 
 Lennon started a skiffle group that was very briefly called the Blackjacks , but changed the name before any public performances . Some accounts credit Lennon with choosing the new name ; other accounts credit his close friend Pete Shotton with suggesting the name . The Quarrymen played at parties , school dances , cinemas and amateur skiffle contests before Paul McCartney joined the band in October 1957 . George Harrison joined the band in early 1958 at McCartney 's recommendation , though Lennon initially resisted because he felt Harrison ( still 14 when he was first introduced to Lennon ) to be too young . Both McCartney and Harrison attended the Liverpool Institute . 
 The group made an amateur recording of themselves in 1958 , performing Buddy Holly 's " That 'll Be the Day " and " In Spite of All the Danger " , a song written by McCartney and Harrison . The group moved away from skiffle and towards rock and roll , causing several of the original members to leave . This left only a trio of Lennon , McCartney , and Harrison , who performed under several other names , including Johnny and the Moondogs and Japage 3 before returning to the Quarrymen name in 1959 . In 1960 , the group changed its name to the Beatles , and went on to have an extremely successful recording career . 
 In 1997 the four surviving original members of the Quarrymen reunited to perform at the 40th anniversary celebrations of the garden fete performance at which Lennon and McCartney met for the first time . The band decided to continue playing , and since 1998 have performed in many countries throughout the world , releasing four albums . As of 2016 , three original members are still actively performing as the Quarrymen . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early performances = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1950s , there was a revival in the United Kingdom of the musical form " skiffle " that had originated in the United States and had been popular in the US in the 1920s , ' 30s and ' 40s . In addition to its popularity among British teenagers as music to listen to , it also spawned a craze of teenage boys starting their own groups to perform the music . One of the primary attractions was that it did not require great musical skills or expensive instruments to be played . Early British skiffle was played by traditional jazz musicians , with the most successful British proponent of the genre in the 1950s being Lonnie Donegan . The Quarrymen 's initial repertoire included several songs that Donegan had recorded . When Lennon wanted to try making music himself , he and fellow Quarry Bank school friend , Griffiths , took guitar lessons in Hunt 's Cross , Liverpool , although Lennon gave up the lessons soon after , as they were based on theory and not actual playing . 
 As Griffiths already knew how to play the banjo , Lennon 's mother showed them how to tune the top four strings of their guitars to the same notes as a banjo , taught them the chords of D , C , and D7 , and the Fats Domino song , " Ain 't That a Shame " . They practised at Lennon 's aunt 's house ( called Mendips ) at 251 Menlove Avenue where Lennon lived , or at Griffiths ' house in <unk> Drive . They learned how to play " Rock Island Line " , " Jump Down Turn Around ( Pick a Bale of Cotton ) " , " <unk> Bound " and " Cumberland Gap " , and later learned how to play " That 's All Right " and " Mean Woman Blues " . 
 Lennon and Griffiths decided to form a skiffle group in November 1956 . This initial line @-@ up consisted of Lennon and Griffiths on guitars , and school friends Pete Shotton and Bill Smith on washboard and tea chest bass , respectively . The group , initially called the Blackjacks , quickly changed their name to the Quarrymen . Both Lennon and Shotton have been credited with coining the name Quarrymen after a line in their school 's song : " Quarrymen , old before our birth . <unk> each muscle and sinew " . The choice of name was tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek as Lennon regarded the reference in the school song to " straining each muscle and sinew " as risible . Smith 's tenure in the band was extremely short , and was replaced in quick succession by Nigel Walley , Ivan Vaughan , and Len Garry throughout late 1956 and early 1957 . Also during this period , drummer Colin Hanton and banjo player Rod Davis joined the group . This group of Lennon , Griffiths , Shotton , Garry , Hanton , and Davis formed the first stable line @-@ up of the group . 
 The group first rehearsed in Shotton 's house on Vale Road , but because of the noise his mother told them to use the corrugated air @-@ raid shelter in the back garden . Rehearsals were moved from the cold air @-@ raid shelter to Hanton 's or Griffiths ' house — as Griffiths ' father had died in WWII , and his mother worked all day . The band also often visited Lennon 's mother at 1 Blomfield Road , listening to her collection of rock and roll records by Elvis , <unk> and Lee 's " Let the Good Times Roll " , and Gene Vincent 's " Be @-@ Bop @-@ A @-@ Lula " which they added to their repertoire . After his tenure on tea @-@ chest bass , Nigel Walley became the group 's manager . Walley sent flyers to local theatres and ballrooms , and put up posters designed by Lennon : " Country @-@ and @-@ western , rock n ' roll , skiffle band — The Quarrymen — Open for Engagements — Please Call Nigel Walley , <unk> 1715 " . Walley managed to secure the group several paid engagements throughout the spring of 1957 , including one at The Cavern Club A jazz club at the time , the Cavern tolerated skiffle as it was considered an offshoot of jazz . Lennon , however , began leading the band in several rock and roll numbers , prompting the club 's manager to send up a note ordering the group to " Cut out the bloody rock " . 
 In July 1957 , Canadian impresario Carroll Levis held a talent contest in Liverpool , the winners of which would appear on the television show Star <unk> Quarrymen played " Worried Man Blues " , and were loudly applauded , but a group from Wales called the Sunnyside Skiffle Group " jumped all over the stage " and outshone the static Quarrymen , and were asked by Levis to fill in the last few minutes of the contest with a second song . Lennon argued heatedly with Levis backstage , saying the Sunnyside Skiffle Group had brought a bus full of supporters with them , and were given " the upper hand " advantage by Levis . After the competition , Levis used a clap @-@ o @-@ meter ( a machine to measure the decibels of the audience 's reaction to the groups ) as they were asked to walk back out onto the stage . The Quarrymen and the Sunnyside skiffle Group both tied by reaching ninety on the meter , but after a second test , the Quarrymen lost by a small margin . 
 = = = Paul McCartney joins the group = = = 
 On Saturday 6 July 1957 , The Quarrymen played at St. Peter 's Church Rose Queen garden fête in Woolton . They first played on the back of a moving flatbed lorry , in a procession of floats that carried the Rose Queen and retiring Rose Queen , Morris dancers , Boy Scouts , Brownies , Girl Guides and Cubs , led by the Band of the Cheshire Yeomanry . At 4 : 15 they played on a permanent stage in the field behind the church , before a display by the City of Liverpool Police Dogs . They were playing " Come Go with Me " when Paul McCartney arrived , and in the Scout hut after the set , Ivan Vaughan introduced McCartney to Lennon , who chatted for a few minutes before the band set up in the church hall for their performance at that evening 's " Grand Dance " . McCartney demonstrated how he tuned his guitar then sang Eddie Cochran 's " Twenty Flight Rock " , Gene Vincent 's " Be @-@ Bop @-@ A @-@ Lula " , and a medley of Little Richard songs . 
 Vaughan and McCartney left before the evening show which started at 8 o 'clock . During the performance there was an unexpected thunderstorm , which made the lights go out . Bob Molyneux , a young schoolmate from Quarry Bank , recorded part of the performance on his <unk> <unk> portable reel @-@ to @-@ reel tape recorder . The tape included versions of Lonnie Donegan 's " Puttin ' on the Style " and Elvis ' " Baby Let 's Play House " . In 1963 , Molyneux offered the tape to Lennon via Ringo Starr , but Lennon never responded , so Molyneux put the tape in a vault . 
 As they were walking home after the evening performance , Lennon and Shotton discussed the afternoon encounter with McCartney , and Lennon said that perhaps they should invite McCartney to join the band . Two weeks later Shotton encountered McCartney cycling through Woolton , and conveyed Lennon 's casual invitation for him to join the Quarrymen , and Vaughan also invited McCartney to join . McCartney said he would join after Scout camp in Hathersage , and a holiday with his family at Butlins holiday camp in Filey , Yorkshire . Shotton and Davis both left the Quarrymen in August , feeling that the group was moving away from skiffle and towards rock , leaving their instruments superfluous . When McCartney returned from holiday he began rehearsing with the Quarrymen , playing songs such as , " Bye Bye Love " ( The Everly Brothers ) and " All Shook Up " , that Lennon and the group had been trying to learn , without success . 
 McCartney made his debut with the band on Friday , 18 October 1957 at a Conservative Club social held at the New <unk> Hall in the Norris Green section of Liverpool . Lennon and McCartney wore cream @-@ coloured sports jackets , which were paid for by the whole group — Walley collected half a crown per week from each member until they were paid for — and the others wore white shirts with tassels and black bootlace ties . To the irritation of the other group members , McCartney endlessly practised the lead guitar intro to " Raunchy " ( by saxophonist Bill Justis ) and a solo from " Guitar Boogie Shuffle " , for days before the engagement , but on the night ( after being specially introduced by Lennon as a new member of the group ) he missed his cue on " Raunchy " , played all the wrong notes , and stepped back in embarrassment between Hanton and Garry . Everyone expected Lennon to say something sarcastic , but the sight of the always overconfident McCartney looking so crestfallen made Lennon laugh out loud so much that he " almost pissed himself " . 
 The Quarrymen continued to play sparse gigs throughout the autumn of 1957 , mostly for local promoter Charlie McBain . During this period , the group almost entirely excised skiffle from their repertoire , focusing on covers of songs by rock and roll singers such as Elvis Presley , Carl Perkins , Little Richard , and Larry Williams , and the Quarrymen 's sound increasingly relied on harmony singing between Lennon and McCartney . An extremely important influence for them at the time was Buddy Holly and his group the Crickets . Around this time , Lennon and McCartney both started writing songs influenced by Holly , Lennon 's " Hello Little Girl " and McCartney 's " I Lost My Little Girl " , and both were impressed with each other 's efforts . The two began writing together , and their writing partnership would become very successful throughout the 1960s . 
 = = = George Harrison 's entry and recording = = = 
 After McCartney 's poor performance on lead guitar at the Conservative Club , the group needed another guitarist to accommodate their new rock @-@ focused repertoire ; McCartney recommended his school friend George Harrison . Harrison first saw the group perform on 6 February 1958 at Wilson Hall , where McCartney introduced him to Lennon . Harrison subsequently auditioned for The Quarrymen in March at Rory Storm 's Morgue Skiffle Club , playing " Guitar Boogie Shuffle " . Lennon thought Harrison ( then 15 ) was too young to join the band , so McCartney engineered another meeting on the upper deck of a Liverpool bus , where Harrison played " Raunchy " for Lennon . After McCartney 's constant advocacy , Lennon allowed the recently turned fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Harrison to join the Quarrymen as lead guitarist . Harrison 's entry into the Quarrymen shifted the group even more away from skiffle , in addition to ending Lennon 's use of banjo chords . Around this time , John Duff Lowe , another school friend of McCartney 's , joined the group on piano . 
 With Harrison 's entry , the Quarrymen now had four guitarists . Lennon and McCartney suggested to Griffiths that he instead buy a bass guitar , but Griffiths refused because of the expense The two subsequently convinced Nigel Walley , still acting as the group 's manager , to fire Griffiths . Walley regretted the incident , and as a result gradually severed his ties with the Quarrymen . Around this same time , Len Garry contracted tubercular meningitis , and spent seven months in the hospital , never playing with the group again . This left Colin Hanton as the last of the group of Lennon 's Quarry Bank classmates that originally comprised the group . In March , McCartney bought an Elpico amplifier with two inputs , and he and Harrison added pickups to their guitars , giving the Quarrymen an electric sound for the first time . 
 Percy Phillips operated a studio called Phillips ' Sound Recording Services at 38 Kensington , Liverpool , between the kitchen and a front room that served as an electrical goods shop . Actors from the Liverpool Playhouse often stayed in the room above the studio , and were asked by Phillips to record monologues and poems . Phillips had just turned 60 years old when Harrison heard about the studio from guitarist Johnny Byrne , who had recorded a version of " Butterfly " there on 22 June 1957 . 
 The Quarrymen booked a recording session on 12 July 1958 at Phillips ' Sound Recording Services , the home studio of Percy Phillips . Harrison was referred to the studio by guitarist John Byrne of the Raving Texans . They recorded straight to disc , as tape would have been an extra expense . The sound was recorded live by a single microphone in the center of the room , and Lennon suggested that Hanton put a scarf over the snare drum to lower the volume . They first recorded Buddy Holly 's " That 'll Be the Day " , followed by a McCartney original ( credited as McCartney / Harrison ) . Both featured Lennon on lead vocals . When the recording was finished , Phillips handed the group a fragile 78rpm record , which was passed around the band for one week each , or lent out to friends . It was later lost until Lowe rediscovered it in 1981 , and sold it to McCartney for an undisclosed amount . The recordings would later be issued on the Beatles ' rarities album Anthology 1 . 
 = = = " The rhythm 's in the guitars " = = = 
 Soon after the recording session , Hanton had a fight with the rest of the group and quit . Lowe too lost contact with the group after leaving Liverpool Institute , leaving the Quarrymen as just a trio of guitarists : Lennon , McCartney , and Harrison . Lennon 's mother was killed in a road accident on 15 July 1958 , dealing him a devastating emotional blow . The group remained mostly inactive throughout the summer , as Lennon took up a job in a restaurant at the Liverpool Airport . McCartney and Harrison , meanwhile , went on holiday hitchhiking in Wales , playing with a local skiffle group called the Vikings . Although Lennon , McCartney , and Harrison remained extremely close , the trio only performed a handful of times in the last months of 1958 . When asked why they had neither a drummer or a bass player , they would respond " The rhythm 's in the guitars . " 
 In the autumn of 1958 , the group had another chance to audition for Carroll Levis , nearly a year and a half after the <unk> 's first Star Search For the audition , the group changed their name to Johnny and the Moondogs . Lennon was without a guitar , his having broken recently . Johnny and the Moondogs passed the first heat of the competition in Liverpool , and were invited to appear in the finals in Manchester . The group performed Buddy Holly 's " Think It Over " to positive reception , but were unable to stay until the end of the competition to receive the results . As they were leaving , Lennon saw a cutaway electric guitar by the stage door , picked it up and walked off with it , later saying that the trip " wasn 't a total loss . " 
 Following their Star Search audition , Johnny and the Moondogs changed their name to Japage 3 ( combining letters from each of the member 's names : John , Paul , and George ) . Lennon had a friend from art school , named Derek Hodkin , who owned a tape recorder , and Lennon convinced him to record the group ( along with McCartney 's brother Mike on drums ) . The group then asked Hodkin to act as their manager , and he agreed . Despite Hodkin 's management , bookings for the group dried up . Harrison began a stint as rhythm guitarist in the Les Stewart Quartet , who had a weekly club engagement . By May , Japage 3 was defunct , although the three continued to see each other socially , and Lennon and McCartney continued to write songs together . 
 = = = The Casbah Club and name change to the Beatles = = = 
 In the summer of 1959 , Mona Best decided to open a club in her cellar , and offered the Les Stewart Quartet a residency if they would help convert the cellar . Harrison and fellow Quartet guitarist Ken Brown , however , missed a show , causing Les Stewart to fire the two and drop the residency . This caused distress to Best , but Harrison offered a solution : he recruited Lennon and McCartney to play , and they returned to calling themselves the Quarrymen . After helping Best finish converting the cellar , the new four guitarist line @-@ up of the Quarrymen ( Lennon , McCartney , Harrison , and Brown ) opened the Casbah Coffee Club on 29 August 1959 . The opening night performance was attended by about 300 local teenagers , but as the cellar had no air conditioning and people were dancing , the temperature rose until it became hard to breathe . The Quarrymen were afforded the use of Brown 's three input amplifier ( which , along with McCartney 's Elpico , meant that all four guitarists were electric ) , and sang through one microphone connected to the club 's small PA system . 
 The group continued their Casbah residency into the new , year , occasionally securing other gigs . In January , Brown grew ill and was unable to play the show . Best , however , insisted that the Quarrymen still pay Brown , but Lennon , McCartney , and Harrison refused ; the incident resulted in the loss of their residency at the Casbah and Brown 's departure from the group . Shortly after , however , Lennon convinced fellow art school student Stuart Sutcliffe to purchase a bass guitar and join the group . The group had no bookings , but began rehearsing vigorously to allow the musical novice Sutcliffe practice on his new instrument . 
 In early 1960 , the Quarrymen returned to Phillip 's Sound Recording Service to record Lennon 's new original song " One After 909 " , although this recording does not survive . Around the same time , the three made a rehearsal tape at McCartney 's home . Harrison is absent ( as he had an apprenticeship ) , and the tape features several jams and original songs , including the McCartney instrumental " Cayenne " . With few gigs during this period the group often wrote letters to secure bookings , several of which survive . The four disliked the Quarrymen name , and went through several others during this period , including Los Paranoias . By March 1960 , Lennon and Sutcliffe came up with a new name : the Beatles . The Beatles ( after several line @-@ up changes , including adding Mona 's son Pete Best on drums ) continued to perform around Liverpool and in Hamburg , Germany for several years , before being signed to Parlophone Records in 1962 . After their signing , the Beatles achieved worldwide fame and became one of the most popular and successful musical artists of all time , before breaking up in 1970 . 
 = = = <unk> : 1994 to present = = = 
 Since the break @-@ up of the Beatles in 1970 and the death of John Lennon in 1980 , members of the Quarrymen have reunited several times . From 1994 to 1995 , Rod Davis and John Lowe recorded an album with studio musicians . This album , Open for Engagements , was released in 1995 under the Quarrymen name . 
 The surviving members of the original line @-@ up of the Quarrymen reunited in 1997 for the 40th anniversary of their performance at the 1957 Woolton village fete — which was the occasion of the first meeting of Lennon and McCartney . All five surviving original members , Pete Shotton , Rod Davis , Len Garry , Eric Griffiths and Colin Hanton , performed . Following this , the group continued to perform — undertaking tours of the UK , the US , Germany , Japan , Russia , Cuba and other countries . The group 's repertoire focuses on the skiffle and early rock and roll they played in their original incarnation with the added roots rock historical perspective of illustrating how American roots music inspired the nascent Beatles . 
 In 2000 , producer and the Beatles ' historian Martin Lewis produced the group performing the Del @-@ Vikings song " Come Go with Me " ( the first song McCartney recalled hearing Lennon sing on the first day they met ) – for use on the soundtrack of the Michael Lindsay @-@ Hogg film Two of Us — a film about the last day that Lennon and McCartney saw each other — in April 1976 . 
 Eric Griffiths died in 2005 , and Pete Shotton retired , owing to ill @-@ health . As of 2016 , Davis , Garry , and Hanton continue to perform around the world . Lowe occasionally performs with them . In September and October 2010 the band undertook a US tour celebrating the 70th anniversary of their founder ( Lennon ) . They appeared in a charity concert for Amnesty International honouring Lennon in New York City on Lennon 's birthday , Saturday 9 October 2010 . 
 Since their 1997 reformation , the Quarrymen have recorded three albums , consisting mostly of covers of 1950s rock and skiffle . 
 = = Members = = 
 Current members 
 Colin Hanton – drums ( 1956 – 58 , 1997 – present ) 
 Rod Davis – banjo ( 1957 ) ; guitar , vocals ( 1994 – 95 , 1997 – present ) 
 Len Garry – tea @-@ chest bass ( 1957 – 58 ) ; vocals , guitar ( 1997 – present ) 
 John Duff Lowe – piano ( 1958 ) ; keyboards , vocals ( 1994 – 95 ; since 2005 , has been a regular guest , although not a constant member ) 
 Former members 
 John Lennon – vocals , guitar ( 1956 – 60 ; died 1980 ) 
 Eric Griffiths – guitar ( 1956 – 58 , 1997 – 2005 ; died 2005 ) 
 Pete Shotton – washboard ( 1956 – 57 , 1997 – 2000 ) 
 Bill Smith – tea @-@ chest bass ( 1956 ) 
 Nigel Walley – tea @-@ chest bass ( 1956 ; Subsequently became " manager " 1956 @-@ 58 ) 
 Ivan Vaughan – tea @-@ chest bass ( 1956 – 57 ; died 1993 ) 
 Paul McCartney – vocals , guitar ( 1957 – 60 ) 
 George Harrison – guitar , vocals ( 1958 – 60 ; died 2001 ) 
 Ken Brown – guitar ( 1959 ; died 2010 ) 
 Stuart Sutcliffe – bass guitar ( 1960 ; died 1962 ) 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = Original = = = 
 = = = Reunion = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Open for Engagements ( 1995 ) 
 Get Back – Together ( 1997 ) 
 Songs We Remember ( 2004 ) 
 Grey Album ( 2012 ) 
 Other recordings 
 " That 'll Be the Day " , " In Spite of All the Danger " ( both recorded in 1958 ) and " Cayenne " ( recorded in 1960 ) are available on the Beatles album Anthology 1 ( 1995 ) 
 A 2000 recording of " Come Go With Me " was featured in the film Two of Us 
 = Whatever ( Ayumi Hamasaki song ) = 
 " Whatever " ( capitalized as " <unk> " ) is a song recorded by Japanese recording artist Ayumi Hamasaki for her second studio album , Loveppears ( 1999 ) . It was written by Hamasaki , while production was handled by Max Matsuura . The track is Hamasaki 's sixth single with Matsuura since her debut single in April 1998 , " Poker Face " . " Whatever " premiered on February 10 , 199 as the lead single from the album . It was re @-@ released on February 28 , 2001 as a CD single . 
 Musically , " Whatever " was described as a dance song , and is written in third person narrative . Upon its release , the track garnered mixed reviews from music critics . Critics praised Hamasaki 's move from pop rock to dance music , but criticized her vocal delivery and song writing . It also achieved success in Japan , peaking at number five on the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart . The re @-@ released single peaked at number 28 on the same chart . As of March 2016 , " Whatever " has sold over 218 @,@ 000 units in Japan alone and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) . 
 The accompanying music video for " Whatever " was shot in Tokyo ; it features Hamasaki in a small white room with waterfalls , with inter cut scenes of an angel in the middle of a destroyed city . An alternative music video was shot for an alternative arrangement of the song ; it features Hamasaki singing in front of a red backdrop . However , Avex scrapped it after they preferred the former version . For additional promotion , the song was featured on several concert tours and New Years live countdown shows by Hamasaki . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Whatever " was written by Hamasaki , composed by Kazuhito Kikuchi , and produced by Max Matsuura . Japanese composer Izumi Miyazaki was in charge of arranging the song , which included instrumentation of synthesizers , keyboards , and a drum machine . It was one of three songs from the Loveppears album composed by Kikuchi . The song was also the only song from Loveppears to be arranged by Miyazaki , and was his final collaboration with Hamasaki . 
 " Whatever " was selected as the lead single from Loveppears and was released in Japan on February 10 , 1999 by Avex Trax . The Mini CD features : the original track , the instrumental version , and alternative versions ( under the alias " J Version " ) of the former tracks . A CD single was released on February 28 , 2001 by Avex Trax in Japan , with a full @-@ frontal body image of Hamasaki in front of a blue backdrop . She is wearing angel wings on her back , with Hamasaki 's and the song 's title superimposed on her . The CD single features : the original version , the instrumental , the two alternative versions , one remix of " Whatever " , one remix of " Appears " , and one remix of " Immature " . 
 " Whatever " is a dance song that lasts five minutes and 36 seconds long . An extended version appeared on the album , which lasts seven minutes and 20 seconds . The song was noted for its musical similarities to other tracks from Loveppears , and is written in third person narrative . It became Hamasaki 's first single to have featured any English language , with the word " Wow " in its lyrics . However , it does not count in using English – language conversation like Hamasaki did in tracks from her 2002 album Rainbow . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Whatever " received mixed reviews from most music critics . Alexey Eremenko , who had written her extended biography at AllMusic , highlighted the song as an album and career stand out track . A reviewer from Yahoo ! GeoCities criticized Hamasaki 's " thin " and " harsh " vocal delivery , but went on to state that her music have " improved " from her debut album , A Song for × × ( 1999 ) . <unk> from Nifty.com highlighted it as one of the album 's best tracks . He commented that despite the " easily " written lyrics for the sing , he commended Hamasaki 's emotional delivery in both the production and her singing . A reviewer from Amazon.co.jp was positive towards the track . The reviewer praised Miyazaki 's arrangement of both the original version and the J version , and commended the song 's composition and Hamasaki 's " homoeopathic " delivery . In early 2014 , in honor of Hamasaki 's sixteenth @-@ year career milestone , Japanese website Goo.ne.jp hosted a poll for fans to rank their favourite songs by Hamasaki out of thirty positions ; the poll was held in only twenty @-@ four hours , and thousands submitted their votes . As a result , " Whatever " was ranked the lowest at thirty , with 13 @.@ 6 percent of the votes . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In Japan , the Mini CD format entered at number five on the Oricon Singles Chart . The Mini CD stayed in the top fifty for nine weeks , selling over 189 @,@ 610 units , and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for shipments of 200 @,@ 000 units . The re @-@ released CD single format entered at number twenty @-@ eight on the chart , the highest entry of her re @-@ released singles . The CD single stayed in the top fifty for three weeks , tallying both the Mini CD and the CD single to twelve charting weeks . The CD single sold an additional 27 @,@ 560 units , combing both the Mini CD and the CD single sales to 217 @,@ 170 . " Whatever " is her thirty @-@ fifth and fifty @-@ seventh best selling single in Japan , her lowest in both the Loveppears and format re @-@ release era respectively . 
 The Mini CD format entered at number five on the Japanese Count Down TV Chart , Hamasaki 's highest charting single and first top ten at the time of February 1999 . The Mini CD slipped to number fifteen the next week , and lasted nine weeks inside the top 100 . " Whatever " was released twice as double A @-@ side vinyl 's with Hamasaki 's single " Appears " . The second vinyl managed to reach ninety @-@ six on the Japanese Count Down chart . The re @-@ released CD single format entered at number twenty @-@ nine on the Count Down TV chart . The CD single stayed in the chart for three weeks , tallying the total weeks to twelve . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video was directed by Wataru Takeishi . This is Takeishi 's first video collaboration with Hamasaki since " Trust " . The overall appearance of the video was inspired by the cover sleeve of " Whatever " , which also featured Hamasaki in an angel costume . Several photoshoot out takes were considered to be released in the CD single , but Avex restricted this . Because of this , only two photos of Hamasaki in the angel costume were distributed ; one for the front cover , and one for the back . The music video also appeared on Hamasaki 's DVD compilation box sets : A Clips , her self @-@ titled video compilation ( 2000 ) , Complete Clip Box ( 2004 ) , A Clip Box 1998 – 2011 ( 2011 ) , and the bonus DVD version with A Complete : All Singles . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video opens with a bench chair inside a pale @-@ blue room , surrounded by interior waterfalls . Glitches of Hamasaki appears , and she starts singing the song while seated . The next scene features damaged – archive footage of a destroyed town , fenced in with barbed wires . A young boy , with pale white skin , blonde dreads , and angel wings , appears in the distance . Several scenes features the boy looking towards the camera , which then inter cuts to scenes with Hamasaki singing the song in the room . The young boy wonders through the destroyed town , observing damaged homes and objects . The boy places his hands upon a dying tree , where he envisions the events of how the town became destroyed and dismantled . These scenes include burning flowers , falling construction , and broken religious statues . The second chorus has Hamasaki singing , and the song break shows the boy observing a blossoming flower which hasn 't died . Smiling , he walks towards it , unbeknown that there is sharp barbed wire surrounding it . Scenes features Hamasaki singing , and shows brief inter cut scenes of barbed wire wrapped around the young boy . Struggling to become free from the wire , the young boy dies and leaves behind a large pile of angel feathers . The final scene features Hamasaki wearing exactly the same outfit as the angel , trapped in a large bird cage , in the room the video started with . The video zooms out on the overall appearance of her . 
 = = = Alternative music video = = = 
 An accompanying music video for an alternative version for " Whatever " ( labelled the " J Version " ) was also directed by Takeishi . The J version , composed and arranged by Keisuke Kikuchi , was intended to be the lead single from Loveppears and use the M version as the b @-@ side . When Kikuchi and Miyazaki submitted their J and M versions of " Whatever " to the head offices of Avex , Matsuura favored Miyazaki 's version over Kikuchi . Kikuchi was disappointed of the verdict , but Avex went ahead in releasing the M version . Because Takeishi had already shot and produced the music video for the J version of " Whatever " , Takeishi had to re @-@ shoot a new video for the M version . The J Version was used in Valentine 's Day commercials for 7 @-@ Eleven . 
 The J version features Hamasaki singing the J version on a white platform in front of a silky red backdrop . The entire full @-@ length video has never been released , but a thirty @-@ second snippet was used as the commercial video for " Whatever " . The J version has been included on her self @-@ titled video compilation ( 2000 ) , Complete Clip Box ( 2004 ) , and its most recent appearance is on the A Clip Box 1998 – 2011 ( 2011 ) . 
 = = Live performances and other appearances = = 
 Hamasaki has performed " Whatever " on several concert tours and New Years countdown shows throughout Asia . The song has been included in one of Hamasaki 's New Years countdown concerts , the 2004 @-@ 2005 live tour . The song has been included on several of Hamasaki 's national and Asian concert tours . The song had made its debut tour performance on Hamasaki 's 2001 Dome Tour and part two of the Dome Tour . Since then , " Whatever " has been included on Hamasaki 's Ayumi Hamasaki Stadium Tour 2002 A , and its most recent inclusion was on her Premium Showcase : Feel the Love concert tour in 2014 . During Hamasaki 's performance , she wears a metallic mini dress , and dances to back @-@ up dancers wearing robotic outfits . " Whatever " has been included on one greatest hits compilation , which is A Complete : All Singles ( 2008 ) , 
 " Whatever " has been remixed by several professional disc jockeys and producers , and has appeared on several remix albums by Hamasaki . This list is : the Laurent Newfield remix on Super Eurobeat Presents Ayu @-@ ro Mix , the FPM 's Winter Bossa remix on Ayu @-@ mi @-@ x II Version JPN , the Ferry Corsten remix on ayu @-@ mi @-@ x II Version US + EU , and both appeared again on Hamasaki 's remix compilation Ayu @-@ mi @-@ x II Version Non @-@ Stop Mega Mix ( 2000 ) . The orchestral acoustic remix was included on her fifth orchestral remix album , Ayu @-@ mi @-@ x 7 Version Acoustic Orchestra ( 2011 ) . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the singles liner notes ; 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Vitalogy = 
 Vitalogy is the third studio album by the American rock band Pearl Jam , released on November 22 , 1994 , through Epic Records . Pearl Jam wrote and recorded Vitalogy while touring behind its previous album Vs . ( 1993 ) . The music on the record was more diverse than previous releases , and consists of aggressive rock songs , ballads and other elements making this Pearl Jam 's first experimental album . 
 The album was first released on vinyl , followed by a release on CD and cassette two weeks later on December 6 , 1994 . The LP sold 34 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release , and until Jack White 's 2014 album Lazaretto it held the record for most vinyl sales in one week since SoundScan began tracking sales in 1991 . Upon its CD release , Vitalogy became the second @-@ fastest selling album in history , only behind the band 's previous release Vs . , selling 877 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The album has been certified five times platinum by the RIAA in the United States . This is Pearl Jam 's last album to feature drummer Dave Abbruzzese . 
 = = Recording = = 
 For its third album , Pearl Jam again worked with producer Brendan O 'Brien . The band wrote many of the songs during soundchecks on its Vs . Tour and the majority of the album 's tracks were recorded during breaks on the tour . The first session took place late in 1993 in New Orleans , Louisiana , where the band recorded " Tremor Christ " and " Nothingman " . The rest of the material was written and recorded in 1994 in sessions in Seattle , Washington and Atlanta , Georgia , with the band finishing the album at Bad Animals Studio in Seattle after the tour 's completion . " Immortality " was written in April 1994 when the band was on tour in Atlanta . Sources state that most of the album was completed by early 1994 , but that either a forced delay by Epic , or the band 's battle with ticket vendor Ticketmaster , were to blame for the delay . 
 Tensions within the band had dramatically increased by this time . Producer Brendan O 'Brien said , " Vitalogy was a little strained . I 'm being polite — there was some imploding going on . " Bassist Jeff Ament said that " communication was at an all @-@ time low . " Drummer Dave Abbruzzese stated that the communication problems started once guitarist Stone Gossard stopped acting as the band 's mediator . According to Gossard , Vitalogy was the first album in which lead vocalist Eddie Vedder made the final decisions . At the time , Gossard thought of quitting the band . Gossard said that the band was having trouble collaborating , so most of the songs were developed out of jam sessions . He added that " eighty percent of the songs were written 20 minutes before they were recorded . " During the production of Vitalogy , lead guitarist Mike McCready went into rehabilitation to receive treatment for alcohol and cocaine abuse . 
 Drums on " Satan 's Bed " were performed by Abbruzzese 's drum tech Jimmy Shoaf . On the day it was recorded , Abbruzzese was in the hospital having his tonsils removed . Vedder and Gossard asked for Shoaf 's help to get a drum machine working , and after setting it up , the pair asked Shoaf to perform the same beat on the drums . He is credited on the lyric sheet as " Jimmy " . Months after finishing the initial recording sessions for Vitalogy , Abbruzzese was fired in August 1994 due to personality conflicts with the band members . Gossard said , " It was the nature of how the politics worked in our band : It was up to me to say , ' Hey , we tried , it 's not working ; time to move on . ' On a superficial level , it was a political struggle : For whatever reason his ability to communicate with Ed and Jeff was very stifled . I certainly don 't think it was all Dave Abbruzzese 's fault that it was stifled . " Jack Irons , the original drummer for the Red Hot Chili Peppers and Abbruzzese 's successor , plays drums on " Hey Foxymophandlemama , That 's Me " . Gossard said , " Jack entered the band right at the end of making Vitalogy . Jack 's a breath of fresh air , a family man . Everybody had a strong sense of friendship with him immediately . He was just there to play drums and help out . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 In a 1995 interview , Guitar World writer Jeff Gilbert described Vitalogy as " strange " and " very eclectic . " McCready agreed , saying , " There is some weird stuff on there . " McCready attributed the album 's sound to the group recording it on tour . During this period Vedder began to contribute in a large capacity as a guitarist . Gossard said , " Vitalogy is the first one where Ed plays guitar and he wrote three to four songs . I remember thinking , ' This is so different . Is anyone going to like this ? ' ... It had a more punk feel to it . Simple songs recorded really quickly . " The album has a notable lack of guitar solos compared with the band 's first two albums . McCready said , " Vitalogy is not really a ' solo ' album . I don 't think the songs demanded solos ; it was more of a rhythmic album . " 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic said that " thanks to its stripped @-@ down , lean production , Vitalogy stands as Pearl Jam 's most original and uncompromising album . " He added that " in between the straight rock numbers and the searching slow songs , Pearl Jam contribute their strangest music — the <unk> of ' Aye <unk> ' , the sub @-@ Tom Waits accordion romp of ' Bugs ' , and the chilling sonic collage ' Hey Foxymophandlemama , That 's Me ' . " " Bugs " features Vedder playing an accordion that he found at a thrift shop , while " Hey Foxymophandlemama , That 's Me " was created using looped recordings of real patients from a psychiatric hospital . 
 Many of the songs on the album seem to be based on the pressures of fame and dealing with the resulting loss of privacy . These include " Not for You " , " Pry , To " , " Corduroy " , " Bugs " , " Satan 's Bed " , and " Immortality " . Vedder said , " I 'm just totally vulnerable . I 'm way too fucking soft for this whole business , this whole trip . I don 't have any shell . There 's a contradiction there , because that 's probably why I can write songs that mean something to someone and express some of these things that other people can 't necessarily express . " The lyrics of " Not for You " express anger at the bureaucracy of the music industry and " how youth is being sold and exploited , " while Vedder said " Corduroy " is about " one person 's relationship with a million people . " In " Pry , To " the phrase " P @-@ r @-@ i @-@ v @-@ a @-@ c @-@ y is priceless to me " is repeated . Many think that the lyrics of " Immortality " may be about Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain 's suicide , although Vedder has denied this , suggesting instead that it 's about " the pressures on someone who is on a parallel train . " The lyrics that appeared in the first live version of " Immortality " were altered before the song was released as part of the album . Vedder said regarding " Nothingman " that " if you love someone and they love you , don 't fuck up ... ' cause you are left with less than nothing . " " Better Man " is a song about an abusive relationship . Vedder wrote " Better Man " when he was in high school and performed it with his previous band , Bad Radio . Considered a " blatantly great pop song " by producer Brendan O 'Brien , Pearl Jam was reluctant to record it and had initially rejected it from Vs. due to its accessibility . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Vitalogy was released first on vinyl on November 22 , 1994 , two weeks before its CD and cassette release , and debuted at No. 55 on the Billboard 200 album chart . The LP sold 34 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release , and until Jack White 's Lazaretto album in 2014 it held the record for most vinyl sales in one week . It was also the first album to chart on the Billboard 200 due to vinyl sales alone since the CD had become the dominant format at that time . When Vitalogy was released on CD and cassette on December 6 , 1994 , it went to No. 1 on the Billboard 200 album chart , selling more than 877 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It was the second @-@ fastest selling album in history , behind only the band 's previous release Vs . Vitalogy has been certified five times platinum by the RIAA , and , as of July 2013 , has sold 4 @.@ 77 million copies in the United States according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 Rolling Stone staff writer Al Weisel gave Vitalogy four out of five stars , describing the album as " a wildly uneven and difficult record , sometimes maddening , sometimes ridiculous , often powerful . " While Weisel praised several songs as " [ matching ] the soaring anthems of Ten , " he criticized some of the more experimental songs as " throwaways and strange experiments that don 't always work . " Jon Pareles of The New York Times praised the album 's diversity compared to the band 's previous records . He commented that the band incorporated " fast but brutal punk , fuzz @-@ toned psychedelia and judicious folk @-@ rock , all of it sounding more spontaneous than before . " Pareles felt that the band continued to be " unremittingly glum " , and described the majority of the songs as " tortured first @-@ person proclamations . " Pareles concluded , " Vedder sounds more alone than ever . " Time reviewer Christopher John Farley singled out " Bugs " as one of the album 's " share of stinkers . " Farley added , " But that 's one admirably experimental failure on a largely successful album . " Despite writing negatively of the album 's " shapeless high @-@ energy riff @-@ rockers " , Newsday staff writer Ira Robbins lauded Vitalogy 's sound and called it a " compelling triumph of surface over substance " . In a mixed review of the album , Mark Jenkins of The Washington Post perceived a lack of subject matter and lyrical substance as Vitalogy 's weakness . 
 Q magazine gave the album four out of five stars , stating " It speaks volumes for Pearl Jam 's continuing creative acumen that they can respond so confidently to a new punk scene that has sprung up . " Robert Christgau of The Village Voice gave the album an A- rating , writing that " Three or four of these songs are faster and <unk> than anything else in P. Jam 's book , token experiments like " Bugs " are genuinely weird , and in an era of compulsory irony [ Vedder 's ] sincerity is something like a relief — a <unk> relief at that . " David Browne of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B + . He said , " Vitalogy marks the first time it 's possible to respect the band 's music as much as its stance . " He added that " despite its musical advances , Vitalogy leaves an odd , unsettling aftertaste . You walk away from it energized , but wondering what price Eddie Vedder , and Pearl Jam , will ultimately pay for it . " Chicago Sun @-@ Times writer Jim DeRogatis gave it three out of four stars and commended Pearl Jam for their earnest songwriting . However , DeRogatis also wrote that the album " leaves you wishing that they 'd just lighten up " . USA Today 's Edna Gundersen gave Vitalogy three and a half out of four stars and stated that it " delivers the band 's most compelling , inventive and confident music to date " , while calling it " the rebel yell of a band that is maturing without mellowing " . Los Angeles Times critic Robert Hilburn gave Vitalogy four out of four stars and viewed its music as an improvement over Pearl Jam 's previous work , writing " This isn 't just the best Pearl Jam album but a better album than the band once even seemed capable of making " . AllMusic staff writer Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album four and a half out of five stars , saying , " Pearl Jam are at their best when they 're fighting , whether it 's Ticketmaster , fame , or their own personal demons . " According to The New Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , " By Vitalogy PJ hit their apex … the band 's creative zenith , finding them doing a Led Zeppelin III on acoustic tracks like ' Corduroy ' and turning in a Tom Waits @-@ like weird attack on ' Bugs ' " . 
 Three singles were released from Vitalogy . The lead single " Spin the Black Circle " ( backed with B @-@ side " Tremor Christ " , also from the album ) , was the band 's first to enter the Billboard Hot 100 , reaching number 18 . At the 1996 Grammy Awards , " Spin the Black Circle " won the band its first Grammy Award , receiving the award for Best Hard Rock Performance . Neither of the album 's other commercially released singles , " Not for You " and " Immortality " , charted on the Hot 100 , but both placed on the Mainstream Rock and Modern Rock charts . Album tracks " Better Man " and " Corduroy " also charted . " Better Man " was the most successful song from Vitalogy on the rock charts , spending a total of eight weeks at number one on the Mainstream Rock charts and reaching number two on the Modern Rock charts . At the 1996 Grammy Awards , Vitalogy received nominations for Album of the Year and Best Rock Album . In 2003 , the album was ranked number 492 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . The album was listed at number 485 on the magazine 's revised list in 2012 . In May 2014 , Loudwire placed Vitalogy at number ten on its " 10 Best Hard Rock Albums of 1994 " list . In July 2014 Guitar World placed the album on its " Superunknown : 50 Iconic Albums That Defined 1994 " list . 
 In 2011 Pearl Jam released a remastered Vitalogy , along with Vs . , in three formats : an Expanded Version , a three @-@ CD Deluxe Edition and a Limited Edition Collector 's Boxed Set . The Expanded Version will feature three bonus tracks : the previously unreleased guitar / organ @-@ only mix of " Better Man " ; a previously unreleased alternate take of " Corduroy " from the Vitalogy session ( recorded by Brendan O 'Brien ) ; and a previously unreleased demo version of " Nothingman " , taken from the original DAT ( recorded at John and Stu 's in Seattle on October 14 , 1993 , featuring Richard <unk> on drums ) . The three @-@ CD Deluxe Edition will feature both the Legacy Versions of Vitalogy and Vs. with their bonus tracks and a copy of Live at the Orpheum Theater , Boston , April 12 , 1994 . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The original title for the album was Life . The first single , " Spin the Black Circle " , was released before the album was released , and on the back of the single it states " From the Epic album Life . " The album title Vitalogy comes from an early twentieth @-@ century medical book on which the cover art and liner notes are based . Vitalogy literally means " the study of life . " 
 Vedder found the medical book at a garage sale . Ament stated , " Ed brought in that book , and we said man that would make a great album cover . " He explained that from Vs. onwards the band tried to take different approaches to packaging its records . Ament said , " We tried really hard , to make it like a book , kind of tipped it so it opened horizontally , which pissed off record stores : they had to put it in sideways . " The packaging cost an extra 50 cents per copy . Problems arose when the band discovered that later versions of the book were still under copyright . The band had to confer with their lawyers in order to work out a final version utilizing the material they wanted to include with the album . 
 The booklet contains outdated discussions of health and well @-@ being . Other notes in the booklet , dealing with life and death reflections , seem to be more personal , like a message typed on one of the last pages , supposedly referring to the loss of a loved one ( " I waited all day. you waited all day .. but you left before sunset ... and I just wanted to tell you the moment was beautiful . Just wanted to dance to bad music ... drive bad cars ... watch bad TV ... should have stayed for the sunset ... if not for me . " ) . The booklet also displays some poems or original sayings not belonging to the songs ' lyrics , but to be interpreted as a commentary to the songs and , again , as a reflection on how life should or shouldn 't be lived . An example is the poem typed on the " Aye <unk> " page . The song 's subtitle is " The song without words " , as it is an instrumental track . But the page displays a sort of poem about the wasted life of a young girl . Another episode of " intruder words " is on the " Not for You " lyrics page . After the second refrain , instead of the actual lyrics , the typed words give a hint about the Sisyphus myth ( " Yeah , you call me Sisyphus love . Yeah , I move the rock . I just don 't want to talk about moving the rock . Anything that distracts me from moving the rock " ) . The lyrics to " Whipping " are written on a copy of a petition to Bill Clinton against " pro @-@ life " killings of abortion doctors . An X @-@ ray of Vedder 's teeth was pictured instead of lyrics on the page for " Corduroy " . 
 = = Tour = = 
 Pearl Jam promoted the album with tours in Asia , Oceania , and the United States in 1995 . The band was joined by new drummer Jack Irons . The short tour of the United States focused on the Midwest and the West Coast . The band continued its boycott against Ticketmaster during its tour of the United States , refusing to play in Ticketmaster 's venue areas , but was surprised that virtually no other bands joined it in refusing to play at Ticketmaster venues . The band chose to use alternate ticketing companies for the shows . 
 The tour of the United States faced various troubles . Ament said that the band and its crew had to " [ build ] shows from the ground up , a venue everywhere we went . " In June 1995 , the band was scheduled to play at San Francisco , California 's Golden Gate Park in front of 50 @,@ 000 people . Before the concert Vedder was forced to stay at a hospital after suffering from the effects of food poisoning . Vedder left the hospital to play the show , however he was not able to finish and ended up performing just seven out of twenty @-@ one songs with the band . Neil Young filled in for Vedder for the rest of the show that day . Vedder said , " That whole [ Golden Gate Park ] thing was a blur based on some bad food . It was really , really bad . Looking back at it , it doesn 't seem as intense as it was , but it was horrible . I just felt not human and looking back I should have got through that show somehow , and I think the fact that Neil [ Young ] was there made me feel like I could get off the hook in some way and I did go out for a few songs . " Because of Vedder 's health the band was forced to cancel the remaining dates of its tour of the United States . Some dates were reinstated while the rest were rescheduled for the fall . About canceling the dates , Vedder said , " I think we all agreed that it had gotten insane , that it was no longer about the music . " Ament later said , " We were so <unk> about the 1995 tour . Had to prove we could tour on our own , and it pretty much killed us , killed our career . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Eddie Vedder . All music is credited to Pearl Jam with the exceptions as ( * ) . Actual music composers listed below . 
 Reissue bonus tracks 
 All lyrics written by Vedder . 
 = = Outtakes = = 
 " Hard to Imagine " , a song previously rejected from Vs . , was also recorded during the Vitalogy sessions . This version found its way on to the soundtrack for the 1998 film , Chicago Cab . " Hard to Imagine " is also included on the 2003 rarities compilation , Lost Dogs , however that version is the one from the Vs. sessions . According to Gossard , " Hard to Imagine " was cut from Vitalogy because it didn 't fit with the other songs the band was writing at the time . " Out of My Mind " , which is featured as a B @-@ side on the " Not for You " single , was premiered on the band 's 1994 spring tour of the United States and was played twice . According to Vedder , the song was just a live improv . 
 = = Chart history = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Heat ( perfume ) = 
 Heat is a perfume endorsed by Beyoncé . It was created by her alongside Claude Dir and Olivier <unk> of the company Givaudan . The product , which was released on February 3 , 2010 , uses the tagline " catch the fever " . The release was promoted with a cover version of " Fever " recorded by Beyoncé and a limited edition extended play ( EP ) also titled Heat . She also appeared at Macy 's Herald Square to launch the perfume and on The Today Show where she discussed about Heat . 
 The fragrance 's commercial , directed by director Jake Nava and released in December 2009 , spawned controversy for its sexually explicit imagery , and was only allowed nighttime broadcast in the United Kingdom . Macy 's sold US $ 3 million worth of Heat between early February and early March 2010 . It received mixed reviews from critics , and it was nominated at several fragrance award ceremonies . 
 Heat was followed by five additional releases : Heat Ultimate Elixir meant to capture a more private side of the entertainer , Heat Rush intended as a daytime fragrance , Midnight Heat , a night fragrance , Heat The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour , a limited product dedicated to the tour of that name and Heat Wild Orchid , a floral update of the original . Each scent was followed with its own Eau De <unk> release and multiple gift sets . In 2013 , in addition to becoming the best @-@ selling celebrity @-@ branded fragrance line , the perfumes went on to become the third best @-@ selling fragrance worldwide with $ 400 million earned at retail globally . 
 = = Conception = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In December 2009 , Beyoncé announced that she would release her first fragrance , titled Heat , the following year . Prior to releasing the fragrance , she had collaborated with Tommy Hilfiger on his perfume True Star in 2004 and Giorgio Armani 's Diamonds for which she also appeared in several promotional campaigns . Beyoncé created the fragrance in 2009 with the testing of its smell done by Coty , Inc .. Beyoncé presented Heat to her fans during backstage meetings on her I Am ... World Tour ( 2009 @-@ 10 ) . It was released in the United States on February 3 , 2010 . According to Beyoncé 's official <unk> website , Heat is a " captivating fragrance that unleashes a spirited fire within . " It was also described as " a unique expression of a woman 's powerful sensuality : sexy , elegant yet feminine with an air of mystery " , summing up that the fragrance reflects " a self @-@ assured woman , who is not afraid to desire and to be desired . " Beyoncés ' official perfume website also described Heat as an " alluring [ and ] modern fragrance ... [ which ] embodies a compelling spirit " . 
 In a behind the scenes video , Beyoncé revealed the reason behind naming the fragrance Heat . According to her , it was because the scent comes off as " infectious " , further elaborating : " It 's like something you can 't get enough of . It 's hot , it 's sexy , it definitely makes you feel like you caught the fever . " She additionally stated that her favorite fragrance notes are red vanilla orchid , due to its " sexy " and " spicy " smell , and honeysuckle , due to its " sensual " and " sweet " smell . She concluded : " It was a lot of work but I was really really happy and I think it 's something I 'll be proud of 20 years from now . " During an interview with Teen Vogue , Beyoncé stated that she loved the perfume because it featured notes of orchid , her favorite flower . She further said that it was suitable for her alter ego Sasha Fierce as it was " fiery " . 
 = = = Packaging and scent = = = 
 Heat is packaged in a red triangular bottle . The top of the bottle is edged with a gold band and the words " Beyoncé " and " Heat " and the cap is etched with the letter B. The scent has been described as floral , fruity and woody , and it was marketed as both " feminine and irresistible " by the entertainer 's official perfume website . The fragrance is described as having top notes of vanilla , magnolia , neroli and peach ; middle notes of almond <unk> , honeysuckle and musk ; and base notes with " a warm and sexy dry @-@ down " of giant sequoia <unk> , tonka bean and amber . Reviewers particularly identified tonka bean , neroli and almond , along with woody and floral notes . Following the release of Heat , Beyoncé described its bottle design , scent and inspiration in depth , as follows : 
 A lot of my performances have had fire involved , so we thought ' Heat . ' Also , red is one of my favorite colors , as is gold . So then we thought of making the bottle look like it 's on fire . I love antique bottles — my mother had a collection of them when I was growing up . I wanted something with an antique yet modern feeling . Even with my wardrobe , I always try to find things that have a little bit of something vintage , yet still timeless and classic . The bottle , I felt , was a great mixture of the two ... Everything , from the bottle design to the name and the ideas for the commercials – that 's me . When I commit to something , I do it 100 percent , and I 've never had [ creative control over a fragrance ] until this project . I learned a lot of great things from the past — but I always asked myself , ' If I could have my own scent , what would it be ? ' I wasn 't worried about deadlines . It could have taken me three , four , however many years — this was my first fragrance , and I wanted to make sure that it was something I would love forever . 
 Products 
 100 ml / 3 @.@ 4 oz 
 50 ml / 1 @.@ 7 oz 
 30 ml / 1 @.@ 0 oz 
 15 ml / 0 @.@ 5 oz 
 Body <unk> 200 ml / 6 @.@ 7 oz 
 Shower Gel 200 ml / 6 @.@ 7 oz 
 Sparkling Body Mist 125 ml / 4 @.@ 2 oz 
 = = Promotion = = 
 In November 2009 , the print advertising for Heat was shot by Michael Thompson , who described Beyoncé as " sultry " on the poster . The image shows her in a seductive pose and wearing a red satin dressing gown under the tagline " Catch the fever " . Thompson revealed in a behind the scenes look at the shoot for the fragrance , that he wanted to capture Beyoncé " in her true essence " , where she " generates heat " and is just " sensual and fun and full of energy . " A writer of Rap @-@ Up praised her look , saying that she was " burning up " the print . The advertisement was published in fashion , beauty and lifestyle magazines in February 2010 . On February 3 , 2010 , Beyoncé launched the scent at Macy 's Herald Square in New York City , where she posed for photos and signed autographs for fans . Heat was released in 2 @,@ 000 department and specialty store doors in the United States . The collection was also released in Canada and Latin America in February 2010 with additional global distribution in Europe , Asia and Australia in August 2010 . On February 9 , 2010 , Beyoncé appeared on The Today Show where she talked about Heat . From January 15 , 2011 to February 15 , 2011 , Seventeen magazine gave away 10 @,@ 000 free samples of Heat . A sample of the fragrance was given for each copy of the February 2011 issue of the magazine bought . A sample of Heat was distributed alongside each copy of Beyoncé 's live album , I Am ... World Tour ( 2010 ) and her fourth studio album , 4 ( 2011 ) . Industry sources estimated that Coty Beauty spent a total of $ 20 million on advertising and promotion of the perfume the first year after its release . 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 The television commercial for Heat was directed by Jake Nava , who previously directed Beyoncé 's videos for her singles " Crazy In Love " , " Baby Boy " , " Beautiful Liar " , " If I Were a Boy " , and " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " . Trey Laird was the executive creative director , while Hans <unk> was the creative director of the video . Laird stated that the main theme of the commercial was that Beyoncé should appear " sexy and a little bit dangerous " , but in a " sophisticated and elegant way " . Released on television channels in December 2009 , the commercial is set to Beyoncé 's cover version of " Fever " ( 2010 ) playing in the background . It features her in the same red satin kimono that she has worn on the print advertisement . The dress has been described as " revealing " . Beyoncé is seen sweating profusely in a steamy bathroom while in one of the scenes , she is seen seemingly enjoying herself in a bath . 
 Nava praised Beyoncé 's acting in the commercial , stating : " She 's so <unk> hot that even when she touches the floor with her dangerous high @-@ heels , she kind of sets her world on fire . " In an interview with Women 's Wear Daily , Beyoncé described the sexual tone of the video stating : " ' It 's called Heat , so we wanted the ads to be really steamy and dewy . My sexiest moments are when I 'm just getting out of the tub or the shower and I 'm clean , so I wanted to incorporate that in the ads . The dress was this liquid @-@ y satin . The song Fever I did years ago and always loved it . [ For the commercial ] I got to sing it a bit more whispery , more natural . " " Fever " was re @-@ recorded by Beyoncé on two different occasions . Knowles first recorded her version of " Fever " on September 9 , 2003 for her film The Fighting Temptations . Before the release of Heat , she recorded " Fever " again for the fragrance 's television commercial . After the launch of Heat , the latter version of the song was officially released as a promotional single to the US iTunes Store through Columbia Records on February 8 , 2010 , to promote the fragrance . It was made available digitally in the United Kingdom the following day . 
 The commercial for the fragrance found controversy in the United Kingdom with UK 's Advertising Standards Authority . It was banned from the country 's daytime TV rotation due to its " sexy imagery " and was only shown after 7 : 30 in the afternoon . The U.K. ' s Advertising Standards Authority commented on the ban decision , stating " We considered that Beyoncé 's body movements and the camera 's prolonged focus on shots of her dress slipping away to partially expose her breasts created a sexually provocative ad that was unsuitable to be seen by young children . " Coty , Inc . , the world 's largest fragrance company , replied to the ban , stating that they do not think there is anything too explicit about the TV spot . Coty continued that the commercial was " intended to reflect the singer Beyoncé 's personal ' sexy chic ' style , " and while Beyoncé 's cleavage is exposed at certain parts of the commercial , Coty stated that it is not " overtly graphic or explicitly sexual and at no point was Beyoncé naked . " Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly defended Beyoncé , saying that " [ the advertisement ] is sexy . It 's suggestive and sultry . But it 's certainly not X @-@ rated . " Beyoncé 's mother and collaborator Tina Knowles called the commercial 's ban " very good " , as people purposely went to watch the video which further increased sales . Beyoncé herself also responded jokingly to the ban , saying , " Where 's the wind coming from ? It started out only [ to stay cool ] , and then it kind of created this effect with my hair ... You can only imagine , the show is two and a half hours . It 's really , really warm onstage . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Amy Odell of New York magazine gave Heat 's scent a negative review . She criticized the fragrance 's packaging as being very similar to that of K @-@ Y Jelly . She stated : " Once on the skin , the scent transformed in a matter of just a few minutes from something floral @-@ y and vaguely acceptable to an offensive mix of car fumes and that vanilla body spray Victoria 's Secret used to sell to 12 @-@ year @-@ olds " , then adding that the perfume 's logo and gold swirls " sway too similar to that of KY Jelly 's " , before concluding that " calling to mind sex is kind of Beyoncé 's thing , which is why this fragrance could just be a smashing success . " Holly Siegel of The New York Times complimented the fragrance 's scent of " floral @-@ fruity @-@ woody blend and notes of neroli , almond and tonka bean . " On October 25 , 2010 , the perfume won a gold status at the Design of the Times Awards by The Strive Group . At the 2011 CEW Beauty Awards , Heat won in the category for Best Fragrance of the Year : Mass . The same year , it also won in the category for Best Fragrance at the Dutch Drugstore Awards , and Best Fragrance in the Lifestyle at the Norwegian Cosmetic Awards . It also received a nomination in the category for Media Campaign of the Year at the 2011 FiFi Awards . 
 It was revealed by Macy 's Chief executive officer , Terry Lundgren , that his chain had sold US $ 3 million worth of Heat between early February 2010 and early March 2010 . Lundgren revealed that , during a one @-@ hour period at the launch of the scent when Beyoncé was at the store signing autographs , 72 @,@ 000 bottles were sold . Within days of the fragrance 's release , it was named as one of the best @-@ selling scents in America . According to The Fragrance Shop in the UK , Heat also topped a poll of best @-@ selling celebrity scents . 
 = = Related products = = 
 During an interview with Women 's Wear Daily in December 2009 , Stephen <unk> announced that Beyoncé planned to release several other fragrances after Heat meant to explore the different sides of her personality . However , he added that Heat was meant to be " the enduring classic ... this scent will re @-@ energize the celebrity category " . Consequently , five additional fragrances were released from the Heat line : Heat Ultimate Elixir , Heat Rush , Midnight Heat , Heat : The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour and Heat Wild Orchid . In 2013 , it was revealed that with $ 400 million earned at retail globally , the line of perfumes was placed at number three on the list of best @-@ selling fragrances . The Heat releases further became the best @-@ selling line of celebrity endorsed fragrances . <unk> discussed his collaboration with Beyoncé on the Heat line , saying : " Beyoncé has always chosen simple and strong concepts for her fragrances . She 's very collaborative in that she know [ s ] what she wants and she has a very clear view of her fan base . There are just a few of that qualities that make her an excellent partner . She is excellent at making decisions and making them happen . " In September 2011 , Beyoncé followed Heat with a new line of fragrances titled Beyoncé Pulse . 
 = = = Heat Ultimate Elixir = = = 
 In August 2010 , it was revealed that Beyoncé would be re @-@ releasing her first fragrance as an " ultimate elixir " , emphasizing elements intended to embody her private side . The scent was released in September 2010 . As its theme , the perfume offers a more intense and sensual version of the original Heat scent . Upon revealing the inspiration of Heat Ultimate Elixir , Beyoncé stated that the reason which motivated her to update the original scent was the idea of her mother 's scent when she was a child : 
 My first memory of fragrance is my mother , and as a very young girl , hearing her footsteps ... Her stilettos click , click , clicking on the hardwood floor and she wore a beautiful fragrance and she would walk past me and it would just stay in the room . It left a warm feeling every time I thought about her scent . I think about the icons that I respect and they all have their own fragrance so I thought it was time for me to have my own . 
 Ultimate Elixir mixes notes of vanilla orchid and <unk> top notes with <unk> and amber middle notes , then adds in vanilla and tonka bean base notes . Kelly Bryant of <unk> wrote that the base notes of Heat Ultimate Elixir " drive the point home that this is a bouquet meant for one sexy siren " . Selling the scent 's elixir , Macy 's described the fragrance as an " opulent and intoxicating twist on the original scent . " Keeping with the scent 's " sexy theme " , the new scarlet jus is contained in the original bottle , updated with a black atomizer , which has been described as " boudoir @-@ ready " by Katherine <unk> <unk> of People magazine . 
 Nathalie Atkinson of The National Post held a sniff test for the Heat Ultimate Elixir perfume to assess the different scents picked up by people of the opposite sex . Cosmetics editor Dave <unk> , who was asked to be the male participant of the scent , described the elixir as " stronger than the original " , noting strong hints in scents such as " peach @-@ flavoured candy paired with nondescript flowers " which offered " a nice <unk> " . Atkinson , the female participant , noted Beyoncé 's intense use of <unk> , adding that the scent holds strong enough " to get noticed above the hairspray fumes and thumping bass " . In a list of " Noseworthy Perfumes " , Oprah Winfrey listed Heat Ultimate Elixir at number two , favoring the fragrance 's " honeysuckle nectar , musk , and warm , sensual " sequoia scent . The Independent described the scent as a " spicier flanker " in comparison to the original release . New York magazine found the fragrance 's packaging " just as ' <unk> ' as the original . " 
 Products 
 50 ml / 1 @.@ 7 oz 
 = = = Heat Rush = = = 
 New fragrance project working sessions for Heat Rush took place backstage in Newcastle upon Tyne , England in November 2009 and the fragrance was released in February 2011 . During the new fragrance project working sessions , Beyoncé deciphered through different scents , later choosing a " Sunset Cocktail Mod 5 " scent because it made her feel " as though a breeze were coming through the room " and seemed " like more of a risk " . Beyoncé 's official perfume website described Heat Rush as a fruity , floral fragrance " that is luminous and vibrant with a dewy delicacy at the same time ... It captures Beyoncé 's bright sensuality ; it 's young , fresh , and joyful . " The same source listed the scent 's top notes as passion fruit , orange and cherry ; the middle notes meant to embody " Beyoncé 's ultra @-@ feminine side " with orchid , mango and orange hibiscus ; and the base notes contain teak , honey and a musk blend that was said to be inspired by sunsets in Brazil . 
 = = = Heat : Limited edition CD = = = 
 A limited edition gift extended play ( EP ) also titled Heat was released in February 2011 , almost a year after the promotional release of " Fever " . Promotion in the United States for the perfume took place with a free tote bag , while the limited edition gift EP was used as promotion for all United Kingdom releases of the perfume . One compact disc copy of the EP was included with every purchase of a 50 ml bottle of Heat . The album also contains remixes of songs Beyoncé previously recorded ; <unk> remixed " At Last " and " Satellites " , Catalyst remixed " Broken @-@ Hearted Girl " , Lost Daze remixed " Smash Into You " . The EP also features Beyoncé 's 2010 cover version of " Fever " . The Catalyst remix of " Broken @-@ Hearted Girl " was previously made available on Beyoncé 's 2009 remix album Above and Beyoncé : Video Collection & Dance Mixes . 
 = = = = Track listing = = = = 
 = = = = Credits = = = = 
 Credits for Heat , adapted from the CD liner notes : 
 Executive producer - Beyoncé Knowles , Moe Cohen 
 Vocals - Knowles 
 Mastering - Tom Coyne 
 Producers - Knowles , Chink Santana , <unk> Sparta , Peter <unk> , Catalyst , Frank DeMaria , Anthony Saputo , Peace <unk> 
 Remix Coordination - Angelo " Pepe " <unk> , Bill Coleman 
 = = = Midnight Heat = = = 
 Midnight Heat was released in July 2012 following Heat Rush . It is packaged in a purple bottle . According to Beyoncé 's official website , " For [ her ] , fragrance is an essential accessory to highlight your inner radiance , confidence and sex appeal . Midnight Heat is the ultimate evening scent , sensual and enticing with just a hint of mystery . " The perfume 's top notes are described as <unk> , apricot and <unk> ; middle notes of orchid , tulip and peony ; and base notes of sandalwood , patchouli and amber . A poster for the fragrance was released on July 18 , 2012 , and shows Beyoncé wearing a purple mini @-@ dress . Idolator 's writer X. Alexander wrote that she looked " appropriately regal in purple in her new fragrance art " while Julee Wilson of The Huffington Post wrote that the advertisement " definitely screams sensual " . Gaby Wilson of MTV commented that the photo appropriately sets the mood for the midnight perfume further praising Beyoncé 's look . Ambika <unk> of VH1 gave a negative review for the poster , writing that she was " really disappointed " because the image was " boring and literal " . She noted , " Sexy hair flying , sexy dress in a color reminiscent of midnight , on a rooftop against the midnight sky — we get it . " A writer of the website Digital Spy praised the scent , writing that it empowers " your inner diva " and added that " there will be no Single Ladies left if you wear this " . At the 2013 <unk> Awards , Midnight Heat was nominated in the category for Best New Fragrance . 
 Products 
 100 ml / 3 @.@ 4 oz 
 50 ml / 1 @.@ 7 oz 
 30 ml / 1 @.@ 0 oz 
 15 ml / 0 @.@ 5 oz 
 Sensual Body <unk> 200ml / 6 @.@ 7 oz 
 = = = Heat : The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour = = = 
 In April 2013 , Beyoncé embarked her fourth concert tour , The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour . In June 2013 , it was announced that a limited edition of Heat , titled Heat : The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour , would be released the same month , inspired by the tour . Speaking about the fragrance , Beyoncé said : " I love my music , I love performing and most of all I love and appreciate my fans . I wanted to give them a special remembrance of this tour and I created this scent to reflect the power , passion and playfulness I put into my performances . " The fragrance opens with mangosteen , black pepper and <unk> palm as its top notes and later continues with violet petals , Indian <unk> Jasmine and a <unk> <unk> Loo orchid as its middle notes before finishing with bourbon vanilla , Australian sandalwood and vetiver as its base notes . Gaby Wilson of MTV noted that the ingredients introduced a lighter scent than her previous releases . According to Beyoncé 's official perfume website , the fragrance is " paying tribute to Beyoncé 's amazing momentous journey " and further " transport [ s ] you into Beyoncé 's world and the intensity of her shows . [ It ] will make you feel the power , passion and playfulness she gives to her fans . " It was also meant to celebrate Beyoncé 's accomplishments and her " historic life journey " . Gregory <unk> Jr. of Billboard magazine described the scent of the fragrance as " strong and feminine " . Holly Carter of People magazine noted that the scent was " the best @-@ smelling alternative " for people who missed The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour . 
 Products 
 100 ml / 3 @.@ 4 oz 
 <unk> / 1 @.@ 0 oz 
 = = = Heat Wild Orchid = = = 
 On June 18 , 2014 it was announced by several publications that Beyoncé would be releasing a new fragrance in August 2014 titled Heat Wild Orchid . The promotional poster for the perfume was also revealed , showing Beyoncé wearing a black dress . Caitlin Morton writing for MTV praised her new , mature and " classy " look . <unk> Ramos from BET echoed her statements stating that it featured a " classier Bey " . The fragrance was released to stores in August 2014 . It was described as an " enticing , mouth @-@ watering fragrance that emits a fierce , feminine energy " in a press release . According to Beyoncé 's website it is a " spellbound scent that expresses the bold femininity of women " : " This captivating and memorable fragrance invites and <unk> those who encounter it " . It was created in collaboration with Firmenich perfumer Honorine Blanc . The fragrance opens with pomegranate , coconut water and <unk> . In the middle notes , a floral scent consisting of honeysuckle and blooming magnolia was used . The base notes showcase blonde woods , skin <unk> and gilded amber . The top of the bottle is wrapped in a gold band inscribed with Beyoncé 's name at the neck . The secondary packaging celebrates the " beauty and sensuality " of the fragrance intertwined with black organza and finished with a gold logo and an emblematic B standing for Beyoncé . MTV 's Caitlin Morton praised Heat Orchid as a fresher and more floral update of the original scent while also deeming it more natural and " maternal " . Glamour 's Leanne Bayley praised the fact that Beyoncé " bottled up her sexiness in one chic bottle " with the fragrance . 
 Products 
 100 ml / 3 @.@ 4 oz 
 50 ml / 1 @.@ 7 oz 
 30 ml / 1 @.@ 0 oz 
 15 ml / 0 @.@ 5 oz 
 = = = Heat Kissed = = = 
 = Iowa ( album ) = 
 Iowa is the second studio album by American heavy metal band , Slipknot . Released by Roadrunner Records on August 28 , 2001 , it was produced by Ross Robinson and Slipknot . The title derives from the band 's home state , Iowa , which members have stated is one of their greatest sources of inspiration . With much anticipation for the band 's second album following on the success of their 1999 self @-@ titled debut , pressures on the band were high . Their relationships with each other suffered and was later described as the darkest time of their career . It was also the first time that guitarist Jim Root had been significantly involved in a Slipknot album due to his joining very late in recording of their debut album , as Root was only featured on two songs from that release . Despite troubles within the band and with Iowa 's development , Slipknot promoted it for almost a year . 
 Iowa was a major success , premiering in the top ten album sales charts in nine countries . Generally positively received , it includes some of their notable songs , such as " Disasterpiece " , " The Heretic Anthem " , " People = Shit " and the two Grammy @-@ nominated songs " Left Behind " and the remix of " My Plague " . While more technical than their debut album , Iowa is considered to be the band 's heaviest and darkest . It has been certified platinum in the United States and Canada . A special edition of Iowa was reissued on November 1 , 2011 to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the record . It was accompanied by a full live audio of the hit DVD Disasterpieces and a film entitled Goat directed by Shawn Crahan with the four music videos , never @-@ seen @-@ before interviews and footage from the Iowa period . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Iowa was recorded and produced at Sound City and Sound Image studios in Los Angeles , California with producer Ross Robinson , who had produced their debut album . Drummer Joey Jordison and bassist Paul Gray began working on new music together in October 2000 and together they wrote material for most of the tracks on the album . During this time other band members wanted a break following the extensive touring which followed their self @-@ titled debut album . However , on January 17 , 2001 , Slipknot entered the studio to begin recording Iowa . This period in the band 's career has become known as one of their worst for several reasons . Jordison stated retrospectively , " that 's where we got into a war " citing the lack of a break for himself and Gray . While other factors , including : vocalist Corey Taylor 's alcohol addiction , several other members ' drug addictions , management issues and more , affected relations in the band . 
 Despite being a member of Slipknot since 1999 , it was the first album where guitarist Jim Root had been significantly involved . He had joined them during the later recording stages of Slipknot and subsequently became more involved with this album . During an interview with Guitar magazine in November 2001 he explained , " it was so exciting as well as scary to be part of this whole huge process " , adding that there was a lot of pressure from fellow guitarist Mick Thomson to perform well on the record . In an interview with FHM in December 2001 , vocalist Corey Taylor revealed that he put himself in specific situations to achieve his performance on the album . While recording vocals for the final song " Iowa " he was completely naked , vomiting all over himself and cutting himself with broken glass . Explaining this , he said , " that 's where the best stuff comes from . You 've got to break yourself down before you can build something great . " While producing the album , Ross Robinson was injured from a dirt bike accident , fracturing his back . He returned to the studio after a day of hospital treatment , reportedly " putting all of his pain into the album " , much to the admiration of the band . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 There was speculation over the title before its announcement with Nine Men , One Mission as the expected title in some sources . Iowa was later announced as its title and was named after the band 's home state of Iowa . Band members have claimed that Iowa is the source of their energy and they consciously made the decision to stay in the area , partly due to the fear of losing their creative direction . The opening track " ( 515 ) " is also a reference to their home state , named after the telephone area code for central Iowa . Initially the album was scheduled for release on June 19 , 2001 , and was to be preceded by a five @-@ date warm @-@ up tour . However , the mixing of the album took longer than anticipated , causing the album 's release to be delayed and the cancellation of the tour . The album was officially released on August 28 , 2001 . In support of the album , Slipknot began touring on their Iowa World Tour . This included : a spot on Ozzfest in 2001 , an American co @-@ headlining tour with System of a Down , as well as tours in Japan , Europe and elsewhere . 
 Prior to the album 's release , Slipknot gave away copies of " Heretic Song " , titled " The Heretic Anthem " on the album , free on their website and was limited to a quantity of 666 copies to coincide with the song 's chorus ; " If you 're 555 , then I 'm 666 . " The giveaway began May 15 , 2001 , and lasted until copies sold out . The first official single released from the album was " Left Behind " . In 2002 , the band made a special appearance in the film Rollerball in which they performed " I Am Hated " . Following this , a second single from the album was released , " My Plague " , which appeared on the soundtrack for the film Resident Evil . 
 = = Music and lyrical themes = = 
 Prior to its release , band members promised a much darker and heavier album than Slipknot , and many sources praised the band for achieving this – effectively fulfilling their promises . During an interview in 2008 , percussionist Shawn Crahan retrospectively evaluated their time creating the album , proclaiming that they owe their overtly darker sound to their state of mind during that period : " When we did Iowa , we hated each other . We hated the world ; the world hated us . " Iowa , unlike its predecessor , saw Robinson capturing the band 's technicality as opposed to the raw energy for which Slipknot is known . The band was also praised for its use of an extended line @-@ up consisting of additional percussionists and electronics . NME stated that " every possible space is covered in scrawl and cymbals : guitars , percussion , electronic squall , subhuman screaming . " Although Iowa is widely regarded as the band 's heaviest album to date , some tracks do include melody , most apparent in " Everything Ends " and " Left Behind " . On the album 's thirteenth anniversary , Revolver looked back on the album as " their most extreme album yet " . They compared several songs , namely " Disasterpiece , " " People = Shit " and " The Heretic Anthem " as more death metal @-@ influenced than most of the nu metal that the album contained . While the album does have elements of hip hop music , Iowa has less hip hop elements than Slipknot 's self @-@ titled album , focusing more on elements of genres such as death metal and hardcore punk . 
 Iowa follows the lyrical style that vocalist Corey Taylor established on Slipknot 's debut album ; it includes strong use of metaphors to describe overtly dark themes including misanthropy , solipsism , disgust , anger , disaffection , psychosis and rejection . The album also includes many expletives ; David Fricke of the Rolling Stone magazine said " there isn 't much shock value left in the words fuck and shit , which Taylor uses in some variation more than forty times in Iowa 's sixty @-@ six minutes . " Fricke went on to praise Taylor 's performance on the track " Iowa " , comparing it to a " vivid evocation of a makeshift @-@ cornfield grave at midnight . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Following the mass success of the band 's self @-@ titled album , author Dick Porter wrote that the anticipation for a follow up was intense . Prior to its release , drummer Jordison proclaimed : " Wait till you hear our fuckin ' next record . It smokes our first album . The shit 's twice as technical , three times as heavy . " The College Music Journal reviewed it as " brutal , unrelenting , scorching ... " Many reviews noted its heavy themes , the Alternative Press stated , " [ it is ] like having a plastic bag taped over your head for an hour while Satan uses your scrotum as a <unk> .... [ It ] is over the top ... you 're going to be left in stitches . " NME said that it is " <unk> , brutal and good . " Rolling Stone credited the album for its originality , stating that " nearly everything else in modern doom rock sounds banal . " Producer Robinson was also praised for his work on the album ; Uncut noted , " The barely relenting , tumbling noise attack marshalled by nu metal uber @-@ producer Ross Robinson is expert . " Reviewing for Yahoo , John Mulvey said , " They 're an evolutionary dead end , the final , absolute triumph of nu metal . " 
 The album 's first single , " Left Behind " , was nominated for the 2002 Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance at the 44th Grammy Awards . The second single , " My Plague " , was nominated in 2003 for the same award at the 45th Grammy Awards . The single " Left Behind " peaked in the top thirty for single sales the United States and the UK . In addition , " My Plague " reached the 43rd position on the UK charts . Iowa was ranked sixth in the " 50 Albums of the year " by NME in 2001 . The album reached the top position on the UK Albums Chart , and the second spot on the ARIA Charts in Australia . The album reached the third spot on the Billboard 200 and Finnish Charts . On October 10 , 2001 , the album was certified platinum in the United States . In Canada , the Canadian Recording Industry Association certified the album as Platinum , on September 5 , 2001 . The British Phonographic Industry has certified the album as gold in the UK . In 2009 , Iowa was rated 3rd in UK magazine Kerrang ! ' s " The 50 Best Albums of the 21st century " reader poll . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All music written by Shawn Crahan , Paul Gray , Joey Jordison , Chris Fehn , Mick Thomson , Sid Wilson , Craig Jones and James Root . All lyrics by Corey Taylor 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Chart procession and succession = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Aside from their real names , members of the band are referred to by numbers zero through eight . 
 = Vocal Studies + Uprock Narratives = 
 Vocal Studies + Uprock Narratives is a 2001 studio album by Guillermo Scott Herren , the first released under the name Prefuse 73 . The album was released in June 11 , 2001 on Warp . The music was created by Herren alone , with some tracks featuring guest vocals from MCs <unk> 9 , MF Doom and Aesop Rock as well as vocalist Sam Prekop from The Sea and Cake . Inspired by Miami bass and early 90s hip hop , Herren had been recording music with his Music Production Center ( MPC ) for Schematic Records , a label known primarily for intelligent dance music ( IDM ) . After working with various local hip hop artists making what he described as " very boring rap beats " , Herren was inspired to take his music in a more left @-@ field direction . 
 Vocal Studies + Uprock Narratives 's music is primarily instrumental and features unintelligible cut @-@ up vocals . Originally inspired to sample the hip hop artists he was signed to work with in the studio , the album consists of samples by more popular hip hop artists including Nas , Ol ' Dirty Bastard and Erykah Badu . Despite being described as electronic music , IDM and glitch and not the kind of music a hip hop audience is used to hearing , Herren felt that his music was closer to hip hop . 
 The album 's release after a tour that included a performance at All Tomorrow 's Parties in the United Kingdom as well as opening for the group Tortoise in the United States . The album did not chart in either the United Kingdom or United States , but received positive reviews from various sources including AllMusic , Spin and Uncut . It was later named as one of the best albums of the year by Rolling Stone and The Globe & Mail and one of the best albums of the first half the 2000s by Pitchfork Media . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 In the mid to late 1990s , Guillermo Scott Herren returned to Decatur , Georgia from New York and worked at a recording studio . Unsatisfied working with the studio 's clients , who he felt made " pre @-@ historic trap music " , Herren was encouraged to take his music in a more left @-@ field direction , as he was " bored with people barking orders at me to make them these really boring rap beats . " In return for Herren handling the studio 's hip hop clients , the studio owner bought him a Music Production Center ( MPC ) which Herren would use to create his Prefuse 73 material . 
 While working at the studio , Herren met Joshua Kay and Romulo del Castillo , two Miami @-@ based producers who had founded Schematic Records , a label known for IDM . Herren recorded and composed music on his MPC and manipulated it to fit Schematic 's aesthetic . While working at the recording studio , Herren felt that the hip hop musicians coming in had very trite lyrics , and felt he could use them for his own Prefuse 73 material . For Vocal Studies + Uprock Narratives , Herren sampled more famous hip hop records by artists including Nas , Ol ' Dirty Bastard and Erykah Badu . Herren stated that he used some of his favorite MCs instead of the musicians he worked with , as he felt these artists were " saying totally relevant stuff , but I guess it was just my excitement to make it happen . But a vocal doesn 't have to say anything . Why not challenge people 's imagination and let it say whatever they want it to ? " For Vocal Studies + Uprock Narratives , Herren created the music using two turntables plugged into his MPC . To create the glitch sounds through the MPC , Herren switched between different sample sources by instantaneously silencing groups of audio channels at the same time . 
 In 1999 , Herren signed to the British label Warp under two aliases , Prefuse 73 and <unk> & Savalas , after Warp staff had heard a previous record of Herren 's which had sparked their interest in his work . Herren was familiar with the label through artists Aphex Twin and Boards of Canada , but chose to sign to Warp as he was an fan of the group Broadcast who had released an EP through the label . Vocal Studies + Uprock Narratives features rapping from <unk> 9 , Aesop Rock and MF Doom , and vocals from Sam Prekop of the indie rock band the Sea and Cake . The vocalists did not work directly with Herren , but sent him audio tapes of their own vocal recordings . Herren later commented on having Prekop sing on the album , noting that having an indie rock artist on the album was his way of trying to get his sound out to a new audience . 
 = = Music = = 
 Herren described the album as an attempt to bridge hip hop instrumentals with vocal @-@ orientated hip hop tracks , saying that the chopped and edited raps were " another layer of music " and that he was " into creating a whole new mangled language [ ... ] it 's a form of communication without communicating , a new flow when you feel like you 're listening to a standard hip hop track but there 's something in it that 's not right . " The cut @-@ up vocals were also described by Herren as a tribute to Miami bass music and the group Mantronix . Herren said : " Old school dirty south and booty shake shit , just the way stuff was edited back then , all the bass music and edit records ... that 's what inspired me . I wanted to make edit records , but bring all the shit that happened afterwards into it , hip hop from the early 90s through the present day . " The song " Nuno " features chopped @-@ up vocals with only the phrase " fuck words of wisdom " intelligible ; the title is a reference to the Portuguese musician Nuno <unk> , whose 1988 album <unk> <unk> also features manipulated vocals including randomly @-@ reassembled tapes of children singing . Herren used a sample from <unk> 's song " <unk> " for " Nuno " . 
 The Sydney Morning Herald stated that " journalists obsessed with labels " had described the music in a range of genres " from ' glitch ' to ' click @-@ hop ' . " Music journalists made other comparisons of the music in context of both electronic and hip hop , with Exclaim ! describing this sound as " not exactly what the hip hop world is used to hearing . " Fact expanded on the description of the two genres , stating that " the sonic cut @-@ ups that characterize Vocal Studies have often been linked to the IDM scene , but they can just as well be understood within the context of scratching and turntablism , where snatching small elements of records and re @-@ contextualizing them was key . " Herren has only described his style as hip hop , saying that he does not listen to electronic music and that " some people have a hard time accepting what I do . " 
 During promotion of his next album One Word Extinguisher , Herren stated that Vocal Studies + Uprock Narratives did not have a particular theme as he was primarily focusing on and developing an editing style . In contrast , his follow @-@ up One Word Extinguisher was about his relationship with a woman and the vast spectrum of emotions felt during a break @-@ up . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Prior to the release of Vocal Studies + Uprock Narratives , Herren performed at the All Tomorrow 's Parties festival at Camber Sands in April 2001 . The festival was curated by the band Tortoise , with whom Herren toured as the opening act in May 2001 . Vocal Studies + Uprock Narratives was released on June 11 , 2001 through Warp on vinyl , compact disc and download . It was Warp 's second release by an American musician , following Richard Devine 's <unk> which had been released in the previous January . The album did not chart in the United States or United Kingdom . Herren was not happy on how the album was promoted , saying : " I couldn 't understand why they were treating me like I was 10 . They were ignoring all the cultural references that were to be found throughout that first record . " He felt the album " would have been easier to package if I 'd been from the Bronx . Instead I was from Miami , and lived in Decatur . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 John Bush of AllMusic described the album as " one of the most enjoyable works of experimental techno heard in several years , a combination of tough , underground hip hop and the fractured neo @-@ electro of Warp favorites Autechre and Plaid . " Noel Dix of Exclaim ! described the album as " a truly remarkable and creative record " , praising its unpredictability . Tedd Kessler of the NME called the album " teeth @-@ clattering but exhilarating " , writing that " behind every wall of hip hop noise ... there lurks a heart @-@ bursting tune and that 's what makes it alluring . " Pitchfork Media wrote that Herren had " painted a portrait of the peculiar state of our urbanity . " Reviewing the album alongside two other Warp releases ( Plaid 's Double Figure and Squarepusher 's Go Plastic ) , Uncut described Vocal Studies as " the pick of this crop " and concluded that it " genuinely seems like a next step for a genre in perpetual need of reinvention . " 
 The BBC gave the album a mixed review , stating that " taken as a whole the album is pretty relentless " and the album was " best taken in small doses " . PopMatters gave the album a negative review , writing that " the new sounds Herren creates are innovative and entertaining ; he simply overdoes it . " 
 = = = Aftermath and influence = = = 
 Vocal Studies + Uprock Narratives was named as one of the best albums of 2001 by several publications , including Pitchfork Media , Ottawa Citizen and Rolling Stone . The Globe & Mail named it the seventh best album of the year , with Carl Wilson writing that " of all the <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ IDM this year , [ the album ] is the only one I go back to as if it were the Rolling Stones . " In 2005 , Pitchfork Media ranked the album the 84th best of 2000 @-@ 2004 . Herren was overwhelmed with the positive reception the album received , exclaiming that " Most of it was so positive , but I 'd also get a really strong reaction from <unk> some that want to kill me , ' cause they 're under the impression that I 'm trying to kill hip hop or something , and I 'm like ' uh see ya , whatever man . ' " 
 According to Pitchfork Media , the album was important for Warp , which had been seeking credibility after relocating their offices to New York City . Herren began acting as A & R member for the label , which had a reputation only for IDM , by introducing it to artists including Anti @-@ Pop Consortium , Battles , and Flying Lotus . In 2011 , after releasing The Only She Chapters , his eighth album for the label , Warp ended their relationship with Herren . The master recordings of his material stayed with the label . 
 Vocal Studies + Uprock Narratives was an influential album for contemporary musicians Amon Tobin and Nick Sanborn of Sylvan Esso . Tobin stated that his single " Verbal " , from his acclaimed 2002 album Out from Out Where , was influenced by Prefuse 73 . Sanborn spoke on the influence of Vocal Studies + Uprock Narratives , referring to it as one of the records that " gave me a doorway into hip hop . I know it 's weird , but he was my entry point into instrumental hip hop , starting a domino effect that led me to Dilla , Madlib and the rest . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks written by Scott Herren 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Vocal Studies + Uprock Narratives liner notes . 
 Scott Herren – performer , writer 
 Estrada / <unk> – design 
 = Te Amo ( Rihanna song ) = 
 " Te Amo " ( English : " I Love You " ) is a song by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna from her fourth studio album , Rated R ( 2009 ) . The electro @-@ Latin song was written by Mikkel S. Eriksen , Tor Erik Hermansen , James Fauntleroy II and Rihanna , with production helmed by Eriksen and Hermansen under their production name , Stargate . " Te Amo " impacted radio in Canada on June 7 , 2010 , and was released via digital download on June 8 , 2010 , in Australia , Italy and New Zealand , as the album 's third international and fifth overall single . " Te Amo " incorporates elements of Latin American music and conveys Rihanna 's struggles as the object of another woman 's desires . 
 Music critics praised the song for its lyrics and for a less futuristic sound than other songs on Rated R. " Te Amo " peaked inside the top ten of national charts , including the Czech Republic , Hungary and Poland . The song also attained top forty positions in Australia , The Netherlands and Slovakia . " Te Amo " was certified gold in four countries . The song 's accompanying music video was directed by longtime collaborator Anthony Mandler and features French supermodel Laetitia Casta , who tries to seduce Rihanna and eventually succeeds . Rihanna performed the song live at Radio 1 's Big Weekend 2010 on May 23 , 2010 in Bangor , Wales . " Te Amo " was also included on the set list of Rihanna 's Last Girl on Earth Tour . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Te Amo " was released as the fourth international and sixth overall single from Rihanna 's fourth studio album , Rated R. The song was written by Mikkel S. Eriksen , Tor Erik Hermansen , James Fauntleroy II and Rihanna , with production helmed by Eriksen and Hermansen under their production name , Stargate . The song was sent for mainstream airplay in Canada on June 7 , 2010 , and released via digital download in Australia , Italy and New Zealand one day later , through Universal Music . In Germany , " Te Amo " was released as a CD single on June 11 , 2010 . 
 Musically , " Te Amo " is a electro @-@ Latin song and is set in common time with a tempo of 172 beats per minute . The song is written in the key of G @-@ sharp minor with Rihanna 's vocal range spanning from the low note of F ♯ 3 to the high note of C ♯ 5 . Lyrically , " Te Amo " tells of a relationship between two women , with one realizing that she is falling in love with Rihanna , proclaiming " Te amo " throughout the song ( the Spanish phrase for " I Love You " ) . As Rihanna realizes that the other woman is falling in love with her , Rihanna sings , " I feel love but I don 't feel that way " , meaning that she knows her suitor loves her , but does not want to become romantically involved with her . Ailbhe Malone of NME described the meaning of the lyrics in her review of Rated R , explaining that Rihanna sings from a male perspective as she portrays a man who cannot commit , rather than a woman who is " clinging to an unrealistic ideal " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Te Amo " received positive reception from music critics . As part of his review for Rated R , Jude Rogers of BBC Music noted that " Te Amo " and " Rockstar 101 " were the less futuristic tracks on the album as they do not feature the heavy electronic influences , which are present on songs such as " Hard " and " G4L " . Robert Copsey of Digital Spy awarded the song a rating of four out of five stars and noted that Rihanna had progressed from singing about a male interest in one of her previous singles , " Rude Boy " , to fantasizing about women , writing " After the rather explicit ' Rude Boy ' campaign , Rihanna 's taking a well @-@ deserved break from titillating the blokes here – only to find herself the object of another lady 's affections . One of her Rated R LPs less menacing moments , ' Te Amo ' finds La Fenty grappling with her sexuality over some irresistible , Latin @-@ infused Stargate beats . " Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music awarded the song four out of five stars and commented on the theme of lesbianism , writing " It 's that old , old story : Girl meets girl . Girl speaks different language to girl . Girl loves girl . Girl doesn 't love girl . Girl sad . We ’ ve all been there , right ? And Rihanna ’ s captured that feeling beautifully . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Upon the release of the album , " Te Amo " made its first chart appearance on the Swedish Singles Chart , where it debuted at number 52 on December 4 , 2009 , and initially charted for a single week . After being released as a promotional CD in Sweden on May 5 , 2010 , the song re @-@ entered the chart at number 53 on July 7 , 2010 . " Te Amo " peaked at number 48 two weeks later on July 30 , and spent a total of six non @-@ consecutive weeks on the chart . In the United Kingdom , the song entered the UK R & B Chart at number 29 on April 24 , 2010 , and peaked at number five weeks on May 29 . The song debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 30 on May 15 , 2010 , and peaked at number 14 two weeks later on May 29 . On May 23 , 2010 , the song entered the Australian Singles Chart and the Swiss Singles Chart at numbers 35 and 58 , respectively . The song peaked at number 22 in its sixth charting week in Australia , and at number nine in Switzerland . " Te Amo " debuted at number 11 in Austria on June 25 , 2010 , and descended to number the following week . However , the song re @-@ peaked at number 11 on July 9 . The song spent eighteen weeks on the chart . In the Flanders and Wallonia regions of Belgium , " Te Amo " debuted on the singles charts at numbers 29 and 28 respectively on June 19 , 2010 , and spent thirteen weeks charting . In the Flanders region , the song peaked at number 14 while the song was more successful in the Wallonia region , peaking at number 10 . 
 Elsewhere in Europe , the song debuted on the Italian Singles Chart on July 15 , 2010 at number nine and peaked at number seven for two weeks . " Te Amo " was less successful in Denmark , Finland and Norway , peaking at numbers 22 , 14 and 12 respectively . In Germany , " Te Amo " became Rihanna 's first song since " Hate That I Love You " in 2007 not to reach the top 10 , and debuted on the German Singles Chart at number 13 on July 26 , 2010 . It fluctuated in the top 20 before reaching its peak at number 11 on July 24 , 2010 . On the European Hot 100 chart , " Te Amo " debuted at number 48 on May 29 , 2010 and peaked at number 18 on July 17 , 2010 . Although " Te Amo " was not released as a single in Canada , the song debuted on the Canadian Hot 100 chart issue dated July 3 , 2010 at number 98 and peaked at number 66 on July 17 , 2010 . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video for " Te Amo " was shot over two days on April 29 and 30 , 2010 , in Vigny , France and was directed by longtime collaborator Anthony Mandler , who had previously directed the music videos for " Wait Your Turn " and " Russian Roulette " . Whilst on set for the video , photographs were released ; they featured Rihanna wearing a vibrant Mara Hoffman maxi dress , which cost over $ 1 @,@ 000 . French supermodel Laetitia Casta played the role of a femme fatale and the apparent love interest of Rihanna . 
 In the video , Rihanna plays Casta 's lesbian love interest . Casta arrives at the castle in a car , and steps out with a very provocative outfit , and meets Rihanna who is waiting inside . Throughout all of the video , Casta tries to seduce Rihanna whilst Rihanna initially resists , but eventually gives in to Casta 's charm . First , she meets Rihanna in the living room and catches her eye . In the next scene , the couple are shown on top of a table with ultraviolet lighting and Casta rubs her head on Rihanna 's legs . They are then shown outside the castle and Rihanna falls to the ground in despair while Casta looks on . Soon , they are shown in a room full of male dancers and Rihanna begins to feel more comfortable around her admirer . The last two scenes are Rihanna and Casta in PVC bondage outfits kissing on a bed in a darkened room , and then at a burning table , looking away from each other . Billboard 's music video reviewer , Monica Herrera commented , " Rihanna saved a far sexier clip than ' Rockstar 101 ' for fans abroad . " She described the video 's various scenes as " Rihanna getting frisky in a bedroom and setting a fire with a sultry female companion . " 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Rihanna performed " Te Amo " for the first time at Radio 1 's Big Weekend 2010 on May 23 , 2010 in Bangor , Wales , where she performed the song as part of a set list , along with " Madhouse " , " Hard " , " Disturbia " , " Rude Boy " , " Russian Roulette " , " Don 't Stop the Music " , " SOS " and " Umbrella " . The performance featured Rihanna wearing " fishnets , boots and a reggae @-@ inspired leather playsuit with go faster stripes in red , green and yellow and a hood " . The song was also included on the set list of the Last Girl on Earth Tour . Rihanna performed the song during the Rock in Rio 2011 in Rio de Janeiro . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Metropolis Studios , London 
 Mixed at Chung King Studios , New York 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the inlay cover of Rated R. 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital Single 
 " Te Amo " ( Album Version ) - 3 : 28 
 " Rude Boy " ( Wideboys Stadium Radio Mix ) - 3 : 16 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 Since May 2013 , RIAA certifications for digital singles include on @-@ demand audio and / or video song streams in addition to downloads . 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Egyptian vulture = 
 The Egyptian vulture ( Neophron percnopterus ) , also called the white scavenger vulture or pharaoh 's chicken , is a small Old World vulture and the only member of the genus Neophron . It is widely distributed ; the Egyptian vulture is found from southwestern Europe and northern Africa to India . The contrasting underwing pattern and wedge @-@ shaped tail make it distinctive in flight as it soars in thermals during the warmer parts of the day . Egyptian vultures feed mainly on carrion but are opportunistic and will prey on small mammals , birds , and reptiles . They also feed on the eggs of other birds , breaking larger ones by tossing a large pebble onto them . The use of tools is rare in birds and apart from the use of a pebble as a hammer , Egyptian vultures also use twigs to roll up wool for use in their nest . Egyptian vultures that breed in the temperate regions migrate south in winter while tropical populations are relatively sedentary . Populations of this species have declined in the 20th century and some island populations are endangered by hunting , accidental poisoning , and collision with power lines . 
 = = Taxonomy and systematics = = 
 The genus Neophron contains only a single species . A few prehistoric species from the Neogene period in North America placed in the genus <unk> ( the name meaning " looks like Neophron " ) are believed to have been very similar to these vultures in lifestyle , but the genetic relationships are unclear . The genus Neophron is considered to represent the oldest branch within the evolutionary tree of vultures . Along with its nearest evolutionary relative , the lammergeier ( <unk> barbatus ) , they are sometimes placed in a separate subfamily , the <unk> . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 There are three widely recognised subspecies of the Egyptian vulture , although there is considerable gradation due to movement and intermixing of the populations . The nominate subspecies , N. p. percnopterus , has the largest range , occurring in southern Europe , northern Africa , the Middle East , Central Asia , and the north @-@ west of India . Populations breeding in the temperate zone migrate south during winter . It has a dark grey bill . 
 The Indian subcontinent is the range of subspecies N. p. ginginianus , the smallest of the three subspecies , which is identifiable by a pale yellow bill . The subspecies name is derived from Gingee in southern India where the French explorer Pierre Sonnerat described it as Le Vautour de <unk> and it was given a Latin name by John Latham in his Index <unk> ( 1790 ) . 
 A small population that is found only in the eastern Canary Islands was found to be genetically distinct and identified as a new subspecies , N. p. majorensis in 2002 . Known locally as the <unk> they are genetically more distant from N. p. percnopterus , significantly greater even than N. p. ginginianus is from N. p. percnopterus . Unlike neighbouring populations in Africa and southern Europe , it is non @-@ migratory and consistently larger in size . The subspecies name majorensis is derived from " <unk> " , the ancient name for the island of Fuerteventura . The island was named by Spanish conquerors in the 15th century after the " <unk> " , the main native Guanche tribe there . One study in 2010 suggested that the species established on the island about 2 @,@ 500 years ago when the island was first colonized by humans . 
 Nikolai Zarudny and <unk> described a subspecies , <unk> , from Baluchistan in 1902 . This was described as having a deeper reddish orange skin on the head and a yellow @-@ tipped dark bill . This has rarely been considered a valid subspecies but the intermediate pattern of bill colouration suggests intermixing of subspecies . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The genus name is derived from Greek mythology . Timandra was the mother of Neophron . Aegypius was a friend of Neophron and about the same age . It upset Neophron to know that his mother Timandra was having a love affair with Aegypius . Seeking revenge , Neophron made advances towards Aegypius ' mother , Bulis . Neophron succeeded and enticed Bulis into entering the dark chamber where his mother and Aegypius were to meet soon . Neophron then distracted his mother , tricking Aegypius into entering the chamber and sleeping with his own mother Bulis . When Bulis discovered the deception she gouged out the eyes of her son Aegypius before killing herself . Aegypius prayed for revenge and Zeus on hearing the prayer changed Aegypius and Neophron into vultures . " <unk> " is derived from Greek for " black wings " : " <unk> " ( <unk> , meaning " blue @-@ black " ) and πτερόν ( pteron , meaning wing ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult 's plumage is white , with black flight feathers in the wings . Wild birds usually appear soiled with a rusty or brown shade to the white plumage , derived from mud or iron @-@ rich soil . Captive specimens without access to soil have clean white plumage . The bill is slender and long , and the tip of the upper mandible is hooked . The nostril is an elongated horizontal slit . The neck feathers are long and form a hackle . The wings are pointed , with the third primary being the longest ; the tail is wedge shaped . The legs are pink in adults and grey in juveniles . The claws are long and straight , and the third and fourth toes are slightly webbed at the base . 
 The bill is black in the nominate subspecies but pale or yellowish in adults of the smaller Indian ginginianus . Rasmussen and Anderton ( 2005 ) suggest that this variation may need further study , particularly due to the intermediate black @-@ tipped bill described in <unk> . The facial skin is yellow and unfeathered down to the throat . The sexes are indistinguishable in plumage but breeding males have a deeper orange facial skin colour than females . Females average slightly larger and are about 10 – 15 % heavier than males . Young birds are blackish or chocolate brown with black and white patches . The adult plumage is attained only after about five years . 
 The adult Egyptian vulture measures 47 – 65 centimetres ( 19 – 26 in ) from the point of the beak to the extremity of the tail feathers . In the smaller N. p. ginginianus males are about 47 – 52 centimetres ( 19 – 20 in ) long while females are 52 – 55 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 20 @.@ 5 – 21 @.@ 9 in ) long . The wingspan is about 2 @.@ 7 times the body length . Birds from Spain weigh about 1 @.@ 9 kilograms ( 4 @.@ 2 lb ) while birds of the Canary Island subspecies majorensis , representing a case of island gigantism , are heavier with an average weight of 2 @.@ 4 kilograms ( 5 @.@ 3 lb ) . 
 = = Distribution and movements = = 
 Egyptian vultures are widely distributed across the Old World with their breeding range from southern Europe to northern Africa east to western and southern Asia . They are rare vagrants in Sri Lanka . They occur mainly on the dry plains and lower hills . In the Himalayas , they go up to about 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) in summer . European populations migrate south to Africa in winter . Vagrants may occur as far south as in South Africa although they bred in the Transkei region prior to 1923 . They nest mainly on rocky cliffs , sometimes adopting ledges on tall buildings in cities and on large trees . 
 Most Egyptian vultures in the subtropical zone of Europe migrate south to Africa in winter . Like many other large soaring migrants , they avoid making long crossings over water . Italian birds cross over through Sicily and into Tunisia making short sea crossings by passing through the islands of <unk> and Pantelleria . Those that migrate through the Iberian Peninsula cross into Africa over the Strait of Gibraltar while others cross further east through the Levant . In summer , some African birds fly further north into Europe and vagrants have been recorded in England and southern Sweden . 
 Migrating birds can sometimes cover 500 kilometres ( 310 mi ) in a single day until they reach the southern edge of the Sahara , 3 @,@ 500 to 5 @,@ 500 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 200 to 3 @,@ 400 mi ) from their summer home . Young birds that have not reached breeding age may overwinter in the grassland and semi @-@ desert regions of the Sahel . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 The Egyptian vulture is usually seen singly or in pairs , soaring in thermals along with other scavengers and birds of prey , or perched on the ground or atop a building . On the ground , they walk with a waddling gait . They feed on a range of food , including mammal faeces ( including those of humans ) , insects in dung , carrion , vegetable matter , and sometimes small animals . When it joins other vulture species at a dead animal , it tends to stay on the periphery and waits until the larger species leave . Wild rabbits ( Oryctolagus cuniculus ) form a significant part of the diet of Spanish vultures . Studies suggest that they feed on ungulate faeces to obtain carotenoid pigments responsible for their bright yellow and orange facial skin . The ability to assimilate carotenoid pigments may serve as a reliable signal of fitness . 
 Egyptian vultures are mostly silent but make high @-@ pitched mewing or hissing notes at the nest and screeching noises when squabbling at a carcass . Young birds have been heard making a hissing croak in flight . They also hiss or growl when threatened or angry . 
 Egyptian vultures roost communally on large trees , buildings or on cliffs . Roost sites are usually chosen close to a dump site or other suitable foraging area . In Spain , summer roosts are formed mainly by immature birds . The favourite roost trees tended to be large dead pines . The number of adults at the roost increases towards June . It is thought that breeding adults may be able to forage more efficiently by joining the roost and following others to the best feeding areas . Breeding birds that failed to raise young may also join the non @-@ breeding birds at the roost during June . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The breeding season is in spring . During the beginning of the breeding season , courting pairs soar high together and one or both may make steep spiralling or swooping dives . The birds are monogamous and pair bonds may be maintained for more than one breeding season and the same nest sites may be reused each year . The nest is an untidy platform of twigs lined with rags and placed on a cliff ledge , building , or the fork of a large tree . Old nest platforms of eagles may also be taken over . Nests placed on the ground are rare but have been recorded in subspecies N. p. ginginianus and N. p. majorensis . 
 Extra @-@ pair copulation with neighbouring birds has been recorded and may be a reason for adult males to stay close to the female before and during the egg laying period . Females may sometimes associate with two males and all three help in raising the brood . The typical clutch consists of two eggs which are incubated in turns by both parents . The eggs are brick red with the broad end covered more densely with blotches of red , brown , and black . The parents begin incubating soon after the first egg is laid leading to asynchronous hatching . The first egg hatches after about 42 days . The second chick may hatch three to five days later and a longer delay increases the likelihood that it will die of starvation . In cliffs where the nests are located close to each other , young birds have been known to clamber over to neighbouring nests to obtain food . In the Spanish population , young fledge and leave the nest after 90 to 110 days . Fledged birds continue to remain dependent on their parents for at least a month . 
 Once the birds begin to forage on their own , they move away from their parents ' territory ; young birds have been found nearly 500 km away from their nest site . One @-@ year @-@ old European birds migrate to Africa and stay there for at least one year . A vulture that fledged in France stayed in Africa for three years before migrating north in spring . After migrating back to their breeding areas , young birds move widely in search of good feeding territories and mates . The full adult plumage is attained in the fourth or fifth year . Egyptian vultures have been known to live for up to 37 years in captivity and at least 21 years in the wild . The probability of survival in the wild varies with age , increasing till the age of 2 and then falling at the age of 5 . Older birds have an annual survival probability varying from 0 @.@ 75 for non @-@ breeders to 0 @.@ 83 for breeding birds . 
 = = = Tool use = = = 
 The nominate population , especially in Africa , is known for its use of stones as tools . When a large egg , such as that of an ostrich or bustard , is located , the bird walks up to it with a large pebble held in its bill and tosses the pebble by swinging the neck down over the egg . The operation is repeated until the egg cracks from the blows . They prefer using rounded pebbles to jagged rocks . This behaviour , first reported by Jane Goodall in 1966 , has however not been recorded in N. p. ginginianus . Tests with both hand @-@ reared and wild birds suggest that the behaviour is innate , not learnt by observing other birds , and displayed once they associate eggs with food and have access to pebbles . Another case of tool @-@ use described from Bulgaria involves the use of a twig as a tool to roll up and gather strands of wool to use for lining the nest . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 Healthy adults do not have many predators , but human activities pose many threats . Collisions with power lines , hunting , intentional poisoning , lead accumulation from ingesting gunshot in carcasses , and pesticide accumulation take a toll on populations . Young birds at the nest are sometimes taken by golden eagles , eagle owls , and red foxes . Only rarely do adult birds attempt to drive away predators . Young birds that fall off of cliff ledges may be preyed on by mammalian predators such as jackals , foxes and wolves . Like all birds they serve as hosts for ectoparasitic birdlice including <unk> <unk> as well as organisms that live within them such as <unk> . 
 Egyptian vulture populations have declined in most parts of its range . In Europe and most of the Middle East , populations in 2001 were half of those from 1980 . In India , the decline has been rapid with a 35 % decrease each year since 1999 . In 1967 – 70 , the area around Delhi was estimated to have 12 @,@ 000 – 15 @,@ 000 of these vultures , with an average density of about 5 pairs per 10 km2 . The exact cause of the decline is not known , but has been linked with the use of the NSAID <unk> , which has been known to cause death in Gyps vultures . 
 In Italy , the number of breeding pairs declined from 30 in 1970 to 9 in the 1990s . Nearly all breeding failures were due to human activities . In Spain , which holds about 50 % of the European population suggested causes of decline include poisoning by accumulation of lead , pesticides ( especially due to large @-@ scale use in the control of Schistocerca gregaria locust swarms ) , and electrocution . Windfarms may also pose a threat . Poorly designed power transmission lines in east Africa electrocute many wintering vultures . A shortage of carrion resulting from new rules for disposal of dead animals following the outbreak of Bovine <unk> Encephalitis in parts of Europe during 2000 may have also had an effect on some populations . 
 The population of Egyptian vultures in the Canary Islands has been isolated from those in Europe and Africa for a significant period of time leading to genetic differentiation . The vulture population there declined by 30 % in the ten years between 1987 and 1998 . The Canarian Egyptian vulture was historically common , occurring on the islands of La Gomera , Tenerife , Gran Canaria , Fuerteventura , and Lanzarote . It is now restricted to Fuerteventura and Lanzarote , the two easternmost islands . The total population in 2000 was estimated at about 130 individuals , including 25 – 30 breeding pairs . Island birds also appear to accumulate significant amounts of lead from scavenging on hunted animal carcasses . The long @-@ term effect of this poison at a sublethal level is not known , though it is known to alter the mineralization of their bones . In order to provide safe and uncontaminated food for nesting birds , attempts have been made to create " vulture restaurants " where carcasses are made available . However , these interventions may also encourage other opportunist predators and scavengers to concentrate at the site and pose a threat to vultures nesting in the vicinity . 
 = = In culture = = 
 In Ancient Egypt , the vulture hieroglyph was the <unk> sign used for the glottal sound ( / ɑː / ) . The Bible makes a reference to the Egyptian vulture under the Hebrew name of <unk> / <unk> which has been translated into English as " <unk> @-@ eagle " . The bird was held sacred to Isis in the ancient Egyptian religion . The use of the vulture as a symbol of royalty in Egyptian culture and their protection by Pharaonic law made the species common on the streets of Egypt and gave rise to the name " pharaoh 's chicken " . 
 A southern Indian temple at <unk> near Chengalpattu was famed for a pair of birds that reputedly visited the temple for " centuries " . These birds were ceremonially fed by the temple priests and arrived before noon to feed on offerings made from rice , wheat , ghee , and sugar . Although normally punctual , the failure of the birds to turn up was attributed to the presence of " sinners " among the onlookers . Legend has it the vultures ( or " eagles " ) represented eight sages who were punished by Shiva , with two of them leaving in each of a series of epochs . 
 The habit of coprophagy in Egyptian vultures gives them the Spanish names of " <unk> " and " <unk> " , which mean " dung @-@ eater " . British naturalists in colonial India considered them to be among the ugliest birds , and their habit of feeding on faeces was particularly despised . 
 = American alligator = 
 The American alligator ( Alligator mississippiensis ) , sometimes referred to colloquially as a <unk> or common alligator , is a large crocodilian reptile endemic to the southeastern United States . It is one of two living species in the genus Alligator within the family Alligatoridae ; it is larger than the other extant alligator species , the Chinese alligator . Adult male American alligators measure 3 @.@ 4 to 4 @.@ 6 m ( 11 to 15 ft ) in length , and can weigh up to 453 kg ( 999 lb ) . Females are smaller , measuring around 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . The American alligator inhabits freshwater wetlands , such as marshes and cypress swamps from Texas to North Carolina . It is distinguished from the sympatric American crocodile by its broader snout , with overlapping jaws and darker coloration , and is less tolerant of saltwater but more tolerant of cooler climates than the American crocodile , which is found only in tropical climates . 
 Alligators are apex predators and consume fish , amphibians , reptiles , birds , and mammals . Hatchlings feed mostly on invertebrates . They play an important role as ecosystem engineers in wetland ecosystems through the creation of alligator holes , which provide both wet and dry habitats for other organisms . Throughout the year , but particularly during the breeding season , alligators bellow to declare territory and locate suitable mates . Male alligators use infrasound to attract females . Eggs are laid in a nest of vegetation , sticks , leaves , and mud in a sheltered spot in or near the water . Young are born with yellow bands around their bodies and are protected by their mother for up to one year . 
 The American alligator is listed as Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature . Historically , hunting had decimated their population , and the American alligator was listed as an endangered species by the Endangered Species Act of 1973 . Subsequent conservation efforts have allowed their numbers to increase and the species was removed from the list in 1987 . Alligators are now harvested for their skins and meat . The species is the official state reptile of three states : Florida , Louisiana , and Mississippi . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The American alligator was first classified by French zoologist François Marie <unk> as Crocodilus <unk> in 1801 . In 1807 Georges Cuvier created the genus Alligator ; the American alligator shares this genus with the Chinese alligator . They are grouped in the family Alligatoridae with the caimans . The superfamily <unk> includes all crocodilians ( fossil and extant ) that are more closely related to the American alligator than to either the Nile crocodile or the gharial . 
 Members of this superfamily first arose in the late Cretaceous . Leidyosuchus of Alberta is the earliest known genus . Fossil alligatoroids have been found throughout Eurasia as land bridges across both the North Atlantic and the Bering Strait have connected North America to Eurasia during the Cretaceous , Paleogene , and Neogene periods . Alligators and caimans split in North America during the late Cretaceous and the latter reached South America by the Paleogene , before the closure of the Isthmus of Panama during the Neogene period . The Chinese alligator likely descended from a lineage that crossed the Bering land bridge during the Neogene . The modern American alligator is well represented in the fossil record of the Pleistocene . The alligator 's full mitochondrial genome was sequenced in the 1990s and it suggests the animal evolved at a rate similar to mammals and greater than birds and most cold @-@ blooded vertebrates . However , the full genome , published in 2014 , suggests that the alligator evolved much more slowly than mammals and birds . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Domestic alligators vary from long and slender to short and robust , possibly due to variations in factors such as growth rate , diet , and climate . Alligators have broad snouts , especially in captive individuals . When the jaws are closed , the edges of the upper jaws cover the lower teeth which fit into the jaws ' hollows . Like the spectacled caiman , this species has a bony nasal ridge , though it is less prominent . The teeth number from 74 – 80 . Dorsally , adult alligators may be olive , brown , gray , or black in color , while their undersides are cream @-@ colored . 
 Some alligators are missing an inhibited gene for melanin , which makes them albino . These alligators are extremely rare and almost impossible to find in the wild . They could only survive in captivity , as they are very vulnerable to the sun and predators . 
 = = = Size = = = 
 The American alligator is a fairly large species of crocodilian . On average it is the second largest species in the Alligatoridae family , behind only the black caiman . As with all crocodilians , and as opposed to many mammals where size eventually diminishes with old age , healthy alligators continue to expand throughout their lives and the oldest specimens are the largest . Very old , large male alligators reach an expected maximum size of up to 4 @.@ 6 m ( 15 ft ) in length , weighing up to 453 kg ( 999 lb ) , while females reach a maximum of 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . On rare occasions , a large , old male may grow to an even greater length . During the 19th and 20th centuries , larger males reaching 5 to 6 m ( 16 to 20 ft ) have been reported . The largest reported individual size was a male killed in 1890 on Marsh Island , Louisiana , and reportedly measured at 5 @.@ 8 m ( 19 ft ) in length , but no voucher specimen was available , since the alligator was left on a muddy bank after having been measured due to having been too massive to relocate . If the size of this animal were correct , it would have weighed approximately 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) . Large adult alligators tend to be relatively robust and bulky compared to other similarly length crocodilians , for example captive males measuring 3 to 4 m ( 9 @.@ 8 to 13 @.@ 1 ft ) were found to weigh 200 to 350 kg ( 440 to 770 lb ) ( although captive specimens may outweigh wild specimens due to lack of hunting behavior and other stressors ) . The largest alligator ever killed in Florida was 5 @.@ 31 m ( 17 @.@ 4 ft ) , as reported by the Everglades National Park . The largest alligator scientifically verified in Florida for the period from 1977 to 1993 was reportedly 4 @.@ 23 m ( 13 @.@ 9 ft ) and weighed 473 kg ( 1 @,@ 043 lb ) , although another specimen ( size estimated from skull ) may have measured 4 @.@ 54 m ( 14 @.@ 9 ft ) . 
 However , American alligators do not normally reach such extreme sizes . In mature males , most specimens grow up to about 3 @.@ 4 m ( 11 ft ) in length , and will weigh up to 227 kg ( 500 lb ) , while in females , the mature size is normally around 2 @.@ 6 m ( 8 @.@ 5 ft ) , with a body weight of up to 91 kg ( 201 lb ) . In <unk> Lake , Florida , adult males averaged 73 @.@ 2 kg ( 161 lb ) in mass and measured 2 @.@ 47 m ( 8 @.@ 1 ft ) in length while adult females averaged 55 @.@ 1 kg ( 121 lb ) and measured 2 @.@ 22 m ( 7 @.@ 3 ft ) . In Lake Griffin State Park , Florida , adults weighed on average 57 @.@ 9 kg ( 128 lb ) . Weight at sexual maturity per one study was stated as averaging 30 kg ( 66 lb ) while adult weight was claimed as 160 kg ( 350 lb ) . While noticeably sexual dimorphic in size in very mature specimens , the sexual dimorphism of this species is relatively modest amongst crocodilians . In the saltwater crocodile , for example , the females are only slightly larger at average ( 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) in the alligator , 2 @.@ 6 m ( 8 @.@ 5 ft ) in the crocodile ) than female American alligators , but the mature males , at 4 @.@ 3 to 5 @.@ 2 m ( 14 to 17 ft ) on average as opposed to 2 @.@ 4 to 4 m ( 7 @.@ 9 to 13 @.@ 1 ft ) expected in mature male alligators , are considerably bigger than male American alligators and at median are nearly twice as long as and at least four times as heavy as the female crocodiles of the same species . Given that female alligators have relatively higher survival rates at an early age and a large percentage of given populations are comprised by immature or young breeding alligators , relatively few large mature males of the expected mature length of 3 @.@ 4 m ( 11 ft ) or more are typically seen . Weight varies considerably depending on length , age , health , season and available food sources . Similar to many other reptiles than range expansively into temperate zones , American alligators from the northern end of their range , such as southern Arkansas , Alabama , and northern North Carolina , tend to reach smaller sizes . The largest alligator caught in Alabama was 4 @.@ 5 m ( 15 ft ) in length , weighing 459 kg ( 1 @,@ 012 lb ) . In Arkansas a man killed an alligator that was 4 @.@ 04 m ( 13 @.@ 3 ft ) and 626 kg ( 1 @,@ 380 lb ) . 
 = = = Physiology = = = 
 When on land , an alligator moves either by sprawling or walking , the latter involving the reptile lifting its belly off the ground . The sprawling of alligators and other crocodilians is not similar to that of salamanders and lizards , being similar to walking . Therefore , the two forms of territorial locomotion can be termed the " low walk " and the " high walk " . Unlike most other land vertebrates , alligators increase their speed through the distal rather than proximal ends of their limbs . In the water , alligators swim like fish , moving their pelvic regions and tails from side to side . American alligators held the record as having the strongest laboratory @-@ measured bite of any living animal , measured at up to 9 @,@ 452 newtons ( 2 @,@ 125 lbf ) . It should be noted that this experiment had not been , at the time of the paper published , replicated in any other crocodilians , and the same laboratory was able to measure a greater bite force in saltwater crocodiles ; notwithstanding this very high biting force , the muscles opening the alligator 's jaw are quite weak , and the jaws can be held closed by hand or tape when an alligator is captured . During respiration , air flow is unidirectional , looping through the lungs during inhalation and exhalation ; the alligator 's abdominal muscles can alter the position of the lungs within the torso , thus shifting the center of buoyancy , which allows the alligator to dive , rise , and roll within the water . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 American alligators are found in the wild in the southeastern United States , from the Great Dismal Swamp in Virginia and North Carolina , south to Everglades National Park in Florida , and west to the southern tip of Texas . They are found in North Carolina , South Carolina , Georgia , Florida , Louisiana , Alabama , Mississippi , Arkansas , Oklahoma , and Texas . They inhabit swamps , streams , rivers , ponds , and lakes . Females and juveniles are also found in Carolina Bays and other seasonal wetlands . While they prefer fresh water , alligators may sometimes wander into brackish water , but are less tolerant of salt water than crocodiles , as the salt glands on their tongues do not function . One study of alligators in north @-@ central Florida found the males preferred open lake water during the spring , while females used both swampy and open water areas . During summer , males still preferred open water , while females remained in the swamps to construct their nests and lay their eggs . Both sexes may den underneath banks or clumps of trees during the winter . 
 American alligators are less vulnerable to cold than American crocodiles . Unlike a crocodile , which would immediately succumb to the cold and drown in water of 45 ° F ( 7 @.@ 2 ° C ) , an alligator can survive in such temperatures for some time without displaying any signs of discomfort . This <unk> is thought to be the reason why American alligators are widespread further north than the American crocodile . In fact , the American alligator is found farther from the equator and is more equipped to handle cooler conditions than any other crocodilian . When the water begins to freeze , alligators stick their snouts through the surface which allows them to breathe above the ice . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 Alligators modify wetland habitats , most dramatically in flat areas such as the Everglades , by constructing small ponds known as alligator holes . This behavior has qualified the American alligator to be considered a keystone species . Alligator holes retain water during the dry season and provide a refuge for aquatic organisms . Aquatic organisms that survive the dry season by seeking refuge in alligator holes are a source of future populations . The construction of nests along the periphery of alligator holes , as well as a buildup of soils during the excavation process , provide drier areas for other reptiles to nest and a place for plants that are intolerant of inundation to colonize . Alligator holes are an oasis during the Everglades dry season , so are consequently important foraging sites for other organisms . In the limestone depressions of cypress swamps , alligator holes tend to be large and deep , while those in marl prairies and rocky glades are usually small and shallow , and those in peat depressions of ridge and slough wetlands are more variable . 
 Alligators play an important role in the restoration of the Everglades as biological indicators of restoration success . Alligators are highly sensitive to changes in the hydrology , salinity , and productivity of their ecosystems ; all are factors that are expected to change with Everglades restoration . Alligators also may control the long @-@ term vegetation dynamics in wetlands by reducing the population of small mammals , particularly coypu , which may otherwise <unk> marsh vegetation . In this way , the vital ecological service they provide may be important in reducing rates of coastal wetland losses in Louisiana . They may provide a protection service for water birds nesting on islands in freshwater wetlands . Alligators prevent predatory mammals from reaching island @-@ based rookeries and in return eat spilled food and birds that fall from their nests . Wading birds appear to be attracted to areas with alligators and have been known to nest at heavily trafficked tourist attractions with large numbers of alligators , such as the St. Augustine Alligator Farm in St. Augustine , Florida . In addition to basking on shore , American alligators can and will climb trees to bask in if no shoreline is available . However , this is not often seen as the alligators will retreat back into the water by jumping from their perch . 
 = = = Hunting and diet = = = 
 The American alligator is considered an apex predator throughout its range . They are opportunists and their diet is determined largely by both the size and age of the alligator and the size and availability of prey . Most alligators will eat a wide variety of animals , including invertebrates , fish , birds , turtles , snakes , amphibians , and mammals . Hatchlings mostly feed on invertebrates such as insects , insect larvae , snails , spiders , and worms . As they grow , alligators gradually expand to larger prey . Once an alligator reaches adulthood , any animal living in the water or coming to the water to drink is potential prey , due to the size and power of the alligator . However , most animals captured by alligators are considerably smaller than the alligator itself . Stomach contents show , among native mammals , muskrats and raccoons are some of the most commonly eaten species . In Louisiana , where introduced coypu are common , they are perhaps the most regular prey for adult alligators , although only larger adult alligators commonly eat this species . Other animals may occasionally be eaten , even large deer or feral wild boars , but these are not normally part of the diet . Occasionally , domestic animals , including dogs , cats , and calves , are taken as available , but are secondary to wild and feral prey . Other prey , including snakes , lizards , and various invertebrates , are eaten occasionally by adults . Water birds , such as herons and egrets , storks , waterfowl and large dabbling rails such as <unk> or coots , are taken when possible . Occasionally , unwary adult birds are grabbed and eaten by alligators , but most predation on bird species occur with unsteady fledgling birds in late summer as the prey of alligators , as fledgling birds attempt to make their first flights near the water 's edge . 
 The diet of adult alligators from central Florida lakes was dominated by fish , highly opportunistically based upon local availability . In Lake Griffin , fish made up 54 % of the diet by weight , with catfish being most commonly consumed while in Lake Apopka , fish made up 90 % of the food and mostly shad were taken and in Lake Woodruff the diet was 84 % fish and largely consists of bass and sunfish . Unusually in this regions , reptiles and amphibians were the most important non @-@ piscivore prey , mostly comprised by turtles and water snakes . In southern Louisiana , crustacean ( largely crayfish and crabs ) were found to be present in the southeastern alligators but largely absent in the southwestern alligator which consumed a relatively high proportion of reptiles , although fish were the most recorded prey for adult alligators and adult males consumed a large portion of mammals . In East Texas , diets were diverse and adult alligators took mammals , reptiles and amphibians and invertebrates ( i.e. snails ) in often equal measure as they did fish . 
 Fish and other aquatic prey taken in the water or at the water 's edge form the major part of alligator 's diet and may be eaten at any time of the day or night . Adult alligators also spend considerable time hunting on land , up to 50 m ( 170 ft ) from water , ambushing terrestrial animals on <unk> and road shoulders . Usually , terrestrial hunting occurs on nights with warm temperatures . When hunting terrestrial prey , alligators may also ambush them from the edge of the water by grabbing them and pulling the prey into the water , the preferred method of predation of larger crocodiles . The teeth of the alligator are designed to grip prey , but can not rip or chew flesh like teeth of some other predators ( such as canids and felids ) . The alligator is capable of biting though a turtle 's shell or a moderately sized mammal bone . 
 Alligators will occasionally prey on large mammals , such as deer , but will usually do so when fish and smaller prey levels go down . Rarely , alligators have been observed killing and eating bobcats , but such events are not common and have little effect on bobcat populations . Alligator predation on Florida panthers is rare , but has been documented . Such incidents usually involve a panther trying to cross a waterway or coming down to a swamp or river to get a drink . The American alligator is the only known natural predator of the panther . Alligator predation on black bears has also been recorded , although it is unknown if the bears taken were full grown adults . Although alligators have been listed as predators of manatees , very little evidence exists of such predation . In the 2000s , when invasive Burmese pythons occupied the Everglades , alligators have been recorded preying on them , possibly controlling populations , thus preventing the invasive species to spread up north . 
 In 2013 , alligators and other crocodilians were reported to also eat fruit . Such behavior has been witnessed , as well as documented from stomach contents , with the alligators eating such fruit as wild grapes , elderberries , and citrus fruits directly from the trees . The discovery of this unexpected part of the alligator diet further reveals that alligators may be responsible for spreading seeds from the fruit it digests across its habitat . 
 = = = = Tool use = = = = 
 American alligators have been documented using lures to hunt prey such as birds . This means they are among the first reptiles recorded to use tools . By balancing sticks and branches on their heads , American alligators are able to lure birds looking for suitable nesting material to kill and consume . This strategy , which is shared by the mugger crocodile , is particularly effective during the nesting season , in which birds are more likely to gather appropriate nesting materials . 
 = = = Vocalizations = = = 
 Crocodilians are the most vocal of all reptiles and have a variety of different calls depending on the age , size , and sex of the animal . The American alligator can perform specific vocalizations to declare territory , signal distress , threaten competitors , and locate suitable mates . Juvenile alligators can perform a high @-@ pitched hatchling call ( a " yelping " trait common to many crocodilian species ' hatchling young ) to alert their mothers when they are ready to emerge from the nest . Juveniles also make a distress call to alert their mothers if they are being threatened . Although alligators have vocal cords , they function differently than mammals . Both males and females bellow loudly to attract mates and declare territory by sucking air into their lungs and blowing it out in intermittent , deep @-@ toned roars . The bellowing of the American alligator is distinct from the loud roaring of most crocodilians , and is considered unique . Male alligators are known to use infrasound during mating bellows . <unk> is performed in a " head oblique , tail arched " posture . <unk> waves from a bellowing male alligator can cause the surface of the water directly over and to either side of its back to literally " sprinkle " in what is commonly called the " water dance " . Large bellowing " choruses " of alligators during the breeding season are commonly initiated by females and perpetuated by males . Observers of large bellowing choruses have noted they are often felt more than they are heard due to the intense infrasound emitted by males . Alligators bellow in B flat , and bellowing choruses can be induced by tuba players , sonic booms , and large aircraft . In addition to bellowing , alligators can growl , hiss , or cough to threaten others and declare territory . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The breeding season begins in the spring . On spring nights , alligators gather in large numbers for group courtship , in the aforementioned " alligator dances " . The female builds a nest of vegetation , sticks , leaves , and mud in a sheltered spot in or near the water . After she lays her 20 to 50 white eggs , about the size of a goose egg , she covers them with more vegetation , which heats as it decays , helping to keep the eggs warm . This differs from Nile crocodiles , which lay their eggs in pits . 
 The temperature at which alligator eggs develop determines their sex ( see temperature @-@ dependent sex determination ) . Those eggs which are hatched at a temperature of 34 ° C ( 93 ° F ) or more become males , while those at a temperature of 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) or lower become female . The nests built on levees are warmer and thus produce males , while the cooler nests of wet marsh produce females . The female remains near the nest throughout the 65 @-@ day incubation period , protecting it from intruders . When the young begin to hatch — their " yelping " calls can sometimes even be heard just before hatching commences — the mother quickly digs them out and carries them to the water in her mouth , as some other crocodilian species are known to do . 
 The young are tiny replicas of adult alligators with a series of yellow bands around their bodies that serve as camouflage . Hatchlings gather into pods and are guarded by their mother and keep in contact with her through their " yelping " vocalizations . Young alligators eat small fish , frogs , crayfish , and insects . They are preyed on by large fish , birds , raccoons , and adult alligators . Mother alligators eventually become more aggressive towards their young , which encourages them to disperse . Young alligators grow 3 – 8 in ( 7 @.@ 6 – 20 @.@ 3 cm ) a year and reach adulthood at 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . An alligator can live up to 50 years . 
 = = = Interactions with exotic species = = = 
 <unk> were introduced into coastal marshes from South America in the mid @-@ 1900s , and their population has since exploded into the millions . They cause serious damage to coastal marshes and may dig burrows in levees . Hence , Louisiana has had a bounty to try to reduce nutria numbers . Large alligators , however , feed heavily on nutria , so alligators may not only control nutria populations in Louisiana , but also prevent them spreading east into the Everglades . Since hunting and trapping preferentially take the large alligators that are the most important in eating nutria , some changes in harvesting may be needed to capitalize on their ability to control nutria . 
 Recently , a population of Burmese pythons became established in Everglades National Park . Substantial alligator populations in the Everglades may be a contributing factor in keeping the python populations low , preventing the spread of the species up north . While events of predation by Burmese pythons on young alligators have been observed , no evidence of a net negative effect has been seen on overall alligator populations . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Historically , hunting and habitat loss have severely impacted alligator populations throughout their range , and whether the species would survive was in doubt . In 1967 , the alligator was listed as an endangered species ( under a law that was the precursor Endangered Species Act of 1973 ) , since it was believed to be in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range . 
 Both the United States Fish and Wildlife Service ( USFWS ) and state wildlife agencies in the South contributed to the American alligator 's recovery . Protection under the Endangered Species Act allowed the species to recuperate in many areas where it had been depleted . States began monitoring their alligator populations to ensure that they would continue to grow . In 1987 , the USFWS removed the animal from the endangered species list , as it was considered to be fully recovered . The USFWS still regulates the legal trade in alligators and their products to protect still endangered crocodilians that may be passed off as alligators during trafficking . 
