 = = Relationships with humans = = 
 = = = Attacks on humans = = = 
 Alligators are capable of killing humans . Mistaken identity leading to an attack is always possible , especially in or near cloudy waters . Alligators are often less aggressive towards humans than larger crocodile species , a few of which ( mainly the Nile and Saltwater crocodiles ) may prey on humans with some regularity . Alligator bites are serious injuries due to the reptile 's sheer bite force and risk of infection . Even with medical treatment , an alligator bite may still result in a fatal infection . 
 As human populations increase , and as they build houses in low @-@ lying areas or fish or hunt near water , incidents are inevitable where alligators intrude , or at least appear to intrude , on human life . Since 1948 , 257 documented attacks on humans in Florida ( about five incidents per year ) have been reported , of which an estimated 23 resulted in death . Only nine fatal attacks occurred in the United States throughout the 1970s – 1990s , but alligators killed 12 people between 2001 and 2007 . In May 2006 , alligators killed three Floridians in less than a week . There have been at least 28 fatal attacks by alligators in the United States since 1970 . 
 = = = Alligator wrestling = = = 
 Since the late 1880s , alligator wrestling has been a source of entertainment for some . Created by the Miccosukee and Seminole tribes prior to the arrival of Europeans , this tourism tradition continues to persist despite criticism from animal rights activists . 
 = = = Alligator farming = = = 
 Today , alligator farming is a large , growing industry in Georgia , Florida , Texas , and Louisiana . These states produce a combined annual total of some 45 @,@ 000 alligator hides . Alligator hides bring good prices and hides in the 6 to 7 @-@ ft range have sold for $ 300 each . The market for alligator meat is growing , and about 300 @,@ 000 pounds ( 140 @,@ 000 kg ) of meat is produced annually . According to the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services , raw alligator meat contains roughly 200 Calories ( 840 kJ ) per 3 @-@ oz ( 85 @-@ g ) serving , of which 27 Calories ( 130 kJ ) come from fat . 
 = = = Symbol = = = 
 The American alligator is the official state reptile of Florida , Louisiana , and Mississippi . Several organizations and products from Florida have been named after the animal . 
 " Gators " has been the nickname of the University of Florida 's sports teams since 1911 . In that year , a printer made a spur @-@ of @-@ the @-@ moment decision to print an alligator emblem on a shipment of the school 's football pennants . The mascot stuck , perhaps because the team captain 's nickname was Gator . 
 The Gator Bowl is a college football game held in Jacksonville annually since 1946 , with Gator Bowl Stadium hosting the event until the 1993 edition . The <unk> is a NHRA drag race held at the Gainesville Raceway in Gainesville since 1970 . 
 = Callisto ( moon ) = 
 Callisto / <unk> / ( Jupiter IV ) is the second @-@ largest moon of Jupiter , after Ganymede . It is the third @-@ largest moon in the Solar System and the largest object in the Solar System not to be properly differentiated . Callisto was discovered in 1610 by Galileo Galilei . At <unk> km in diameter , Callisto has about 99 % the diameter of the planet Mercury but only about a third of its mass . It is the fourth Galilean moon of Jupiter by distance , with an orbital radius of about <unk> km . It is not in an orbital resonance like the three other Galilean satellites — Io , Europa , and Ganymede — and is thus not appreciably tidally heated . Callisto 's rotation is tidally locked to its orbit around Jupiter , so that the same hemisphere always faces inward ; Jupiter appears to stand nearly still in Callisto 's sky . It is less affected by Jupiter 's magnetosphere than the other inner satellites because of its more remote orbit , located just outside Jupiter 's main radiation belt . 
 Callisto is composed of approximately equal amounts of rock and ices , with a mean density of about 1 @.@ 83 g / cm3 , the lowest density and surface gravity of Jupiter 's major moons . Compounds detected spectroscopically on the surface include water ice , carbon dioxide , silicates , and organic compounds . Investigation by the Galileo spacecraft revealed that Callisto may have a small silicate core and possibly a subsurface ocean of liquid water at depths greater than 100 km . 
 The surface of Callisto is the oldest and most heavily cratered in the Solar System . It does not show any signatures of subsurface processes such as plate tectonics or volcanism , with no signs that geological activity in general has ever occurred , and is thought to have evolved predominantly under the influence of impacts . Prominent surface features include multi @-@ ring structures , variously shaped impact craters , and chains of craters ( catenae ) and associated scarps , ridges and deposits . At a small scale , the surface is varied and made up of small , sparkly frost deposits at the tips of high spots , surrounded by a low @-@ lying , smooth blanket of dark material . This is thought to result from the sublimation @-@ driven degradation of small landforms , which is supported by the general deficit of small impact craters and the presence of numerous small knobs , considered to be their remnants . The absolute ages of the landforms are not known . 
 Callisto is surrounded by an extremely thin atmosphere composed of carbon dioxide and probably molecular oxygen , as well as by a rather intense ionosphere . Callisto is thought to have formed by slow accretion from the disk of the gas and dust that surrounded Jupiter after its formation . Callisto 's gradual accretion and the lack of tidal heating meant that not enough heat was available for rapid differentiation . The slow convection in the interior of Callisto , which commenced soon after formation , led to partial differentiation and possibly to the formation of a subsurface ocean at a depth of 100 – 150 km and a small , rocky core . 
 The likely presence of an ocean within Callisto leaves open the possibility that it could harbor life . However , conditions are thought to be less favorable than on nearby Europa . Various space probes from Pioneers 10 and 11 to Galileo and Cassini have studied Callisto . Because of its low radiation levels , Callisto has long been considered the most suitable place for a human base for future exploration of the Jovian system . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 Callisto was discovered by Galileo in January 1610 , along with three other large Jovian moons — Ganymede , Io , and Europa . 
 = = = Name = = = 
 Callisto is named after one of Zeus 's many lovers in Greek mythology . Callisto was a nymph ( or , according to some sources , the daughter of Lycaon ) who was associated with the goddess of the hunt , Artemis . The name was suggested by Simon Marius soon after Callisto 's discovery . Marius attributed the suggestion to Johannes Kepler . However , the names of the Galilean satellites fell into disfavor for a considerable time , and were not revived in common use until the mid @-@ 20th century . In much of the earlier astronomical literature , Callisto is referred to by its Roman numeral designation , a system introduced by Galileo , as Jupiter IV or as " the fourth satellite of Jupiter " . In scientific writing , the adjectival form of the name is Callistoan , pronounced / <unk> / , or <unk> . 
 = = Orbit and rotation = = 
 Callisto is the outermost of the four Galilean moons of Jupiter . It orbits at a distance of approximately 1 880 000 km ( 26 @.@ 3 times the 71 492 km radius of Jupiter itself ) . This is significantly larger than the orbital radius — 1 070 000 km — of the next @-@ closest Galilean satellite , Ganymede . As a result of this relatively distant orbit , Callisto does not participate in the mean @-@ motion resonance — in which the three inner Galilean satellites are locked — and probably never has . 
 Like most other regular planetary moons , Callisto 's rotation is locked to be synchronous with its orbit . The length of Callisto 's day , simultaneously its orbital period , is about 16 @.@ 7 Earth days . Its orbit is very slightly eccentric and inclined to the Jovian equator , with the eccentricity and inclination changing quasi @-@ periodically due to solar and planetary gravitational perturbations on a timescale of centuries . The ranges of change are 0 @.@ <unk> – 0 @.@ <unk> and 0 @.@ 20 – 0 @.@ 60 ° , respectively . These orbital variations cause the axial tilt ( the angle between rotational and orbital axes ) to vary between 0 @.@ 4 and 1 @.@ 6 ° . 
 The dynamical isolation of Callisto means that it has never been appreciably tidally heated , which has important consequences for its internal structure and evolution . Its distance from Jupiter also means that the charged @-@ particle flux from Jupiter 's magnetosphere at its surface is relatively low — about 300 times lower than , for example , that at Europa . Hence , unlike the other Galilean moons , charged @-@ particle irradiation has had a relatively minor effect on Callisto 's surface . The radiation level at Callisto 's surface is equivalent to a dose of about 0 @.@ 01 rem ( 0 @.@ 1 mSv ) per day , which is seven times less than Earth receives . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 The average density of Callisto , 1 @.@ 83 g / cm3 , suggests a composition of approximately equal parts of rocky material and water ice , with some additional volatile ices such as ammonia . The mass fraction of ices is 49 – 55 % . The exact composition of Callisto 's rock component is not known , but is probably close to the composition of L / LL type ordinary chondrites , which are characterized by less total iron , less metallic iron and more iron oxide than H chondrites . The weight ratio of iron to silicon is 0 @.@ 9 – 1 @.@ 3 in Callisto , whereas the solar ratio is around 1 : 8 . 
 Callisto 's surface has an albedo of about 20 % . Its surface composition is thought to be broadly similar to its composition as a whole . Near @-@ infrared spectroscopy has revealed the presence of water ice absorption bands at wavelengths of 1 @.@ 04 , 1 @.@ 25 , 1 @.@ 5 , 2 @.@ 0 and 3 @.@ 0 micrometers . Water ice seems to be ubiquitous on the surface of Callisto , with a mass fraction of 25 – 50 % . The analysis of high @-@ resolution , near @-@ infrared and UV spectra obtained by the Galileo spacecraft and from the ground has revealed various non @-@ ice materials : <unk> and iron @-@ bearing hydrated silicates , carbon dioxide , sulfur dioxide , and possibly ammonia and various organic compounds . Spectral data indicate that Callisto 's surface is extremely heterogeneous at the small scale . Small , bright patches of pure water ice are intermixed with patches of a rock – ice mixture and extended dark areas made of a non @-@ ice material . 
 The Callistoan surface is asymmetric : the leading hemisphere is darker than the trailing one . This is different from other Galilean satellites , where the reverse is true . The trailing hemisphere of Callisto appears to be enriched in carbon dioxide , whereas the leading hemisphere has more sulfur dioxide . Many fresh impact craters like Lofn also show enrichment in carbon dioxide . Overall , the chemical composition of the surface , especially in the dark areas , may be close to that seen on D @-@ type asteroids , whose surfaces are made of carbonaceous material . 
 = = = Internal structure = = = 
 Callisto 's battered surface lies on top of a cold , stiff , and icy lithosphere that is between 80 and 150 km thick . A salty ocean 50 – 200 km deep may lie beneath the crust , indicated by studies of the magnetic fields around Jupiter and its moons . It was found that Callisto responds to Jupiter 's varying background magnetic field like a perfectly conducting sphere ; that is , the field cannot penetrate inside Callisto , suggesting a layer of highly conductive fluid within it with a thickness of at least 10 km . The existence of an ocean is more likely if water contains a small amount of ammonia or other antifreeze , up to 5 % by weight . In this case the water + ice layer can be as thick as 250 – 300 km . Failing an ocean , the icy lithosphere may be somewhat thicker , up to about 300 km . 
 Beneath the lithosphere and putative ocean , Callisto 's interior appears to be neither entirely uniform nor particularly variable . Galileo orbiter data ( especially the dimensionless moment of inertia — 0 @.@ <unk> ± 0 @.@ 0042 — determined during close flybys ) suggest that its interior is composed of compressed rocks and ices , with the amount of rock increasing with depth due to partial settling of its constituents . In other words , Callisto is only partially differentiated . The density and moment of inertia are compatible with the existence of a small silicate core in the center of Callisto . The radius of any such core cannot exceed 600 km , and the density may lie between 3 @.@ 1 and 3 @.@ 6 g / cm3 . Callisto 's interior is in stark contrast to that of Ganymede , which appears to be fully differentiated . 
 = = = Surface features = = = 
 The ancient surface of Callisto is one of the most heavily cratered in the Solar System . In fact , the crater density is close to saturation : any new crater will tend to erase an older one . The large @-@ scale geology is relatively simple ; there are no large mountains on Callisto , volcanoes or other endogenic tectonic features . The impact craters and multi @-@ ring structures — together with associated fractures , scarps and deposits — are the only large features to be found on the surface . 
 Callisto 's surface can be divided into several geologically different parts : cratered plains , light plains , bright and dark smooth plains , and various units associated with particular multi @-@ ring structures and impact craters . The cratered plains constitute most of the surface area and represent the ancient lithosphere , a mixture of ice and rocky material . The light plains include bright impact craters like Burr and Lofn , as well as the effaced remnants of old large craters called palimpsests , the central parts of multi @-@ ring structures , and isolated patches in the cratered plains . These light plains are thought to be icy impact deposits . The bright , smooth plains constitute a small fraction of Callisto 's surface and are found in the ridge and trough zones of the Valhalla and Asgard formations and as isolated spots in the cratered plains . They were thought to be connected with endogenic activity , but the high @-@ resolution Galileo images showed that the bright , smooth plains correlate with heavily fractured and knobby terrain and do not show any signs of resurfacing . The Galileo images also revealed small , dark , smooth areas with overall coverage less than 10 @,@ 000 km2 , which appear to <unk> the surrounding terrain . They are possible cryovolcanic deposits . Both the light and the various smooth plains are somewhat younger and less cratered than the background cratered plains . 
 Impact crater diameters seen range from 0 @.@ 1 km — a limit defined by the imaging resolution — to over 100 km , not counting the multi @-@ ring structures . Small craters , with diameters less than 5 km , have simple bowl or flat @-@ floored shapes . Those 5 – 40 km across usually have a central peak . Larger impact features , with diameters in the range 25 – 100 km , have central pits instead of peaks , such as <unk> crater . The largest craters with diameters over 60 km can have central domes , which are thought to result from central tectonic uplift after an impact ; examples include Doh and <unk> craters . A small number of very large — more 100 km in diameter — and bright impact craters show anomalous dome geometry . These are unusually shallow and may be a transitional landform to the multi @-@ ring structures , as with the Lofn impact feature . Callisto 's craters are generally shallower than those on the Moon . 
 The largest impact features on Callisto 's surface are multi @-@ ring basins . Two are enormous . Valhalla is the largest , with a bright central region 600 kilometers in diameter , and rings extending as far as 1 @,@ 800 kilometers from the center ( see figure ) . The second largest is Asgard , measuring about 1 @,@ 600 kilometers in diameter . Multi @-@ ring structures probably originated as a result of a post @-@ impact concentric fracturing of the lithosphere lying on a layer of soft or liquid material , possibly an ocean . The catenae — for example <unk> <unk> — are long chains of impact craters lined up in straight lines across the surface . They were probably created by objects that were tidally disrupted as they passed close to Jupiter prior to the impact on Callisto , or by very oblique impacts . A historical example of a disruption was Comet Shoemaker @-@ Levy 9 . 
 As mentioned above , small patches of pure water ice with an albedo as high as 80 % are found on the surface of Callisto , surrounded by much darker material . High @-@ resolution Galileo images showed the bright patches to be predominately located on elevated surface features : crater rims , scarps , ridges and knobs . They are likely to be thin water frost deposits . Dark material usually lies in the lowlands surrounding and mantling bright features and appears to be smooth . It often forms patches up to 5 km across within the crater floors and in the <unk> depressions . 
 On a sub @-@ kilometer scale the surface of Callisto is more degraded than the surfaces of other icy Galilean moons . Typically there is a deficit of small impact craters with diameters less than 1 km as compared with , for instance , the dark plains on Ganymede . Instead of small craters , the almost ubiquitous surface features are small knobs and pits . The knobs are thought to represent remnants of crater rims degraded by an as @-@ yet uncertain process . The most likely candidate process is the slow sublimation of ice , which is enabled by a temperature of up to 165 K , reached at a subsolar point . Such sublimation of water or other volatiles from the dirty ice that is the bedrock causes its decomposition . The non @-@ ice remnants form debris avalanches descending from the slopes of the crater walls . Such avalanches are often observed near and inside impact craters and termed " debris aprons " . Sometimes crater walls are cut by sinuous valley @-@ like incisions called " gullies " , which resemble certain Martian surface features . In the ice sublimation hypothesis , the low @-@ lying dark material is interpreted as a blanket of primarily non @-@ ice debris , which originated from the degraded rims of craters and has covered a predominantly icy bedrock . 
 The relative ages of the different surface units on Callisto can be determined from the density of impact craters on them . The older the surface , the denser the crater population . Absolute dating has not been carried out , but based on theoretical considerations , the cratered plains are thought to be ~ 4 @.@ 5 billion years old , dating back almost to the formation of the Solar System . The ages of multi @-@ ring structures and impact craters depend on chosen background cratering rates and are estimated by different authors to vary between 1 and 4 billion years . 
 = = = Atmosphere and ionosphere = = = 
 Callisto has a very tenuous atmosphere composed of carbon dioxide . It was detected by the Galileo Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer ( <unk> ) from its absorption feature near the wavelength 4 @.@ 2 micrometers . The surface pressure is estimated to be 7 @.@ 5 × 10 − 12 bar ( 0 @.@ 75 µPa ) and particle density 4 × 108 cm − 3 . Because such a thin atmosphere would be lost in only about 4 days ( see atmospheric escape ) , it must be constantly replenished , possibly by slow sublimation of carbon dioxide ice from Callisto 's icy crust , which would be compatible with the sublimation – degradation hypothesis for the formation of the surface knobs . 
 Callisto 's ionosphere was first detected during Galileo flybys ; its high electron density of 7 – 17 × 104 cm − 3 cannot be explained by the photoionization of the atmospheric carbon dioxide alone . Hence , it is suspected that the atmosphere of Callisto is actually dominated by molecular oxygen ( in amounts 10 – 100 times greater than CO 
 2 ) . However , oxygen has not yet been directly detected in the atmosphere of Callisto . Observations with the Hubble Space Telescope ( HST ) placed an upper limit on its possible concentration in the atmosphere , based on lack of detection , which is still compatible with the ionospheric measurements . At the same time HST was able to detect condensed oxygen trapped on the surface of Callisto . 
 = = Origin and evolution = = 
 The partial differentiation of Callisto ( inferred e.g. from moment of inertia measurements ) means that it has never been heated enough to melt its ice component . Therefore , the most favorable model of its formation is a slow accretion in the low @-@ density Jovian subnebula — a disk of the gas and dust that existed around Jupiter after its formation . Such a prolonged accretion stage would allow cooling to largely keep up with the heat accumulation caused by impacts , radioactive decay and contraction , thereby preventing melting and fast differentiation . The allowable timescale of formation of Callisto lies then in the range 0 @.@ 1 million – 10 million years . 
 The further evolution of Callisto after accretion was determined by the balance of the radioactive heating , cooling through thermal conduction near the surface , and solid state or subsolidus convection in the interior . Details of the subsolidus convection in the ice is the main source of uncertainty in the models of all icy moons . It is known to develop when the temperature is sufficiently close to the melting point , due to the temperature dependence of ice viscosity . <unk> convection in icy bodies is a slow process with ice motions of the order of 1 centimeter per year , but is , in fact , a very effective cooling mechanism on long timescales . It is thought to proceed in the so @-@ called stagnant lid regime , where a stiff , cold outer layer of Callisto conducts heat without convection , whereas the ice beneath it <unk> in the subsolidus regime . For Callisto , the outer conductive layer corresponds to the cold and rigid lithosphere with a thickness of about 100 km . Its presence would explain the lack of any signs of the endogenic activity on the Callistoan surface . The convection in the interior parts of Callisto may be layered , because under the high pressures found there , water ice exists in different crystalline phases beginning from the ice I on the surface to ice VII in the center . The early onset of subsolidus convection in the Callistoan interior could have prevented large @-@ scale ice melting and any resulting differentiation that would have otherwise formed a large rocky core and icy mantle . Due to the convection process , however , very slow and partial separation and differentiation of rocks and ices inside Callisto has been proceeding on timescales of billions of years and may be continuing to this day . 
 The current understanding of the evolution of Callisto allows for the existence of a layer or " ocean " of liquid water in its interior . This is connected with the anomalous behavior of ice I phase 's melting temperature , which decreases with pressure , achieving temperatures as low as 251 K at 2 @,@ 070 bar ( 207 MPa ) . In all realistic models of Callisto the temperature in the layer between 100 and 200 km in depth is very close to , or exceeds slightly , this anomalous melting temperature . The presence of even small amounts of ammonia — about 1 – 2 % by weight — almost guarantees the liquid 's existence because ammonia would lower the melting temperature even further . 
 Although Callisto is very similar in bulk properties to Ganymede , it apparently had a much simpler geological history . The surface appears to have been shaped mainly by impacts and other <unk> forces . Unlike neighboring Ganymede with its grooved terrain , there is little evidence of tectonic activity . Explanations that have been proposed for the contrasts in internal heating and consequent differentiation and geologic activity between Callisto and Ganymede include differences in formation conditions , the greater tidal heating experienced by Ganymede , and the more numerous and energetic impacts that would have been suffered by Ganymede during the Late Heavy Bombardment . The relatively simple geological history of Callisto provides planetary scientists with a reference point for comparison with other more active and complex worlds . 
 = = Potential habitability = = 
 It is speculated that there could be life in Callisto 's subsurface ocean . Like Europa and Ganymede , as well as Saturn 's moons Enceladus , Mimas , Dione and Titan , a possible subsurface ocean might be composed of salt water . 
 It is possible that halophiles could thrive in the ocean . As with Europa and Ganymede , the idea has been raised that habitable conditions and even extraterrestrial microbial life may exist in the salty ocean under the Callistoan surface . However , the environmental conditions necessary for life appear to be less favorable on Callisto than on Europa . The principal reasons are the lack of contact with rocky material and the lower heat flux from the interior of Callisto . Scientist Torrence Johnson said the following about comparing the odds of life on Callisto with the odds on other Galilean moons : 
 The basic ingredients for life — what we call ' pre @-@ biotic chemistry ' — are abundant in many solar system objects , such as comets , asteroids and icy moons . Biologists believe liquid water and energy are then needed to actually support life , so it 's exciting to find another place where we might have liquid water . But , energy is another matter , and currently , Callisto 's ocean is only being heated by radioactive elements , whereas Europa has tidal energy as well , from its greater proximity to Jupiter . 
 Based on the considerations mentioned above and on other scientific observations , it is thought that of all of Jupiter 's moons , Europa has the greatest chance of supporting microbial life . 
 = = Exploration = = 
 The Pioneer 10 and Pioneer 11 Jupiter encounters in the early 1970s contributed little new information about Callisto in comparison with what was already known from Earth @-@ based observations . The real breakthrough happened later with the Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 flybys in 1979 . They imaged more than half of the Callistoan surface with a resolution of 1 – 2 km , and precisely measured its temperature , mass and shape . A second round of exploration lasted from 1994 to 2003 , when the Galileo spacecraft had eight close encounters with Callisto , the last flyby during the C30 orbit in 2001 came as close as 138 km to the surface . The Galileo orbiter completed the global imaging of the surface and delivered a number of pictures with a resolution as high as 15 meters of selected areas of Callisto . In 2000 , the Cassini spacecraft en route to Saturn acquired high @-@ quality infrared spectra of the Galilean satellites including Callisto . In February – March 2007 , the New Horizons probe on its way to Pluto obtained new images and spectra of Callisto . 
 The next planned mission to the Jovian system is the European Space Agency 's Jupiter Icy Moon Explorer ( JUICE ) , due to launch in 2022 . Several close flybys of Callisto are planned during the mission . 
 = = = Old proposals = = = 
 Formerly proposed for a launch in 2020 , the Europa Jupiter System Mission ( EJSM ) was a joint NASA / ESA proposal for exploration of Jupiter 's moons . In February 2009 it was announced that ESA / NASA had given this mission priority ahead of the Titan Saturn System Mission . ESA 's contribution still faced funding competition from other ESA projects . EJSM consisted of the NASA @-@ led Jupiter Europa Orbiter , the ESA @-@ led Jupiter Ganymede Orbiter , and possibly a JAXA @-@ led Jupiter Magnetospheric Orbiter . 
 = = Potential colonization = = 
 In 2003 NASA conducted a conceptual study called Human Outer Planets Exploration ( HOPE ) regarding the future human exploration of the outer Solar System . The target chosen to consider in detail was Callisto . 
 The study proposed a possible surface base on Callisto that would produce rocket propellant for further exploration of the Solar System . Advantages of a base on Callisto include low radiation ( due to its distance from Jupiter ) and geological stability . Such a base could facilitate remote exploration of Europa , or be an ideal location for a Jovian system waystation servicing spacecraft heading farther into the outer Solar System , using a gravity assist from a close flyby of Jupiter after departing Callisto . 
 In December 2003 , NASA reported that a manned mission to Callisto may be possible in the 2040s . 
 = Cleveland Centennial half dollar = 
 The Cleveland Centennial half dollar is a commemorative United States half dollar struck at the Philadelphia Mint in 1936 and 1937 , though all bear the earlier date . Sometimes known as the Cleveland Centennial Great Lakes Exposition half dollar , it was issued to mark the 100th anniversary of Cleveland , Ohio as an incorporated city , and in commemoration of the Great Lakes Exposition , held in Cleveland in 1936 . 
 In the mid @-@ 1930s , commemorative coins were quickly increasing in value , and Cincinnati businessman Thomas G. Melish , a coin collector , sought to get Congress to authorize several new issues , of which he would be the sole distributor . He was successful with the Cincinnati Musical Center half dollar , from which he profited greatly , and with the Cleveland piece . Brenda Putnam designed the coin , which was approved by the Commission of Fine Arts after suggestions by sculptor Lee Lawrie . 
 Melish distributed the Cleveland coins via sales at the exposition , at local banks , and by mail order from his office in Cincinnati . Sales were good , and the full authorized mintage of 50 @,@ 000 was struck . Congress had inserted safeguards in the legislation to prevent repetition of past abuses , and though some of the coins were minted in 1937 , there was no change of date , meaning collectors would only have to purchase one piece to have a complete set . Thousands remained in dealer inventories for years , and the coins remain inexpensive by the standards of commemorative coins of the era . 
 = = Background = = 
 The area known as the Western Reserve , now in eastern Ohio , was the subject of dispute among the states after the American Revolutionary War , several of which claimed it as part of their territory . Although political rights to the area were given up to the federal government , Connecticut kept land ownership , and used part of its holdings to resettle those whose homes had been destroyed by the British during the war . The remainder was sold to the Connecticut Land Company in 1795 . Moses Cleaveland was a surveyor , a lawyer , and one of the company 's directors . In 1796 , he set out a townsite along Lake Erie , that came to bear his name . In 1830 , a newspaper , to be called the Cleaveland Advertiser , was begun . The editor found the name one character too long to fit in the printing form , and dropped the first " a " in Cleaveland — a change that was adopted by the public . The town of Cleveland became a city in 1836 . 
 Thomas G. Melish was a prominent Cincinnati businessman , who had inherited the <unk> Wire Company . Melish was also a coin collector , who came up with an idea for a commemorative coin that he would control . At the time , commemoratives were not sold by the government — Congress , in authorizing legislation , designated an organization which had the exclusive right to purchase the coins at face value and vend them to the public at a premium . The result was the 1936 Cincinnati Music Center half dollar , an issue controlled by Melish and issued to commemorate an anniversary that did not exist . Melish sold only a few coins at the issue price , which was high , keeping back most for later sale once scarcity drove the price higher . By 1936 , the market for U.S. commemorative coins had become , according to Q. David Bowers , " as hot as a volcano " and " Congress gave [ Melish ] permission to have his own commemorative coins minted and to charge the public whatever he liked for them ! " Melish , who had friends in Congress , had in early 1936 also tried to get lawmakers to authorize other commemorative issues that he would control . The only one of these that came to fruition was the Cleveland Centennial half dollar . 
 = = Legislation = = 
 A bill for a Cleveland Centennial half dollar was introduced into the United States Senate by Ohio 's Robert J. Bulkley on March 23 , 1936 , and it was referred to the Committee on Banking and Currency . The bill was to honor the 100th anniversary of Cleveland 's incorporation as a city , and the Great Lakes Exposition , to be held there in 1936 . The original bill would have provided for 50 @,@ 000 pieces , which could be purchased from the United States Bureau of the Mint at any time , and could be struck by any or all of the three mints then in operation . The bill was reported out of committee by chairman Alva B. Adams of Colorado on March 26 , drastically amended . 
 Adams had held hearings on other commemorative coins on March 11 , 1936 , and had heard of the abuses as issuers sought to get collectors to buy their coins . These included getting additional designs authorized ( as in the case of the Arkansas Centennial half dollar ) and having the coins struck at all three mints . As the law required coins to bear the year of striking , minting them in successive years at multiple mints created more varieties that coin enthusiasts would have to buy to keep their collections complete . The committee heard of the Oregon Trail Memorial half dollar , authorized in 1926 and still being struck in 1936 , and of commemorative coins created with intentionally low mintages as a way of inflating prices . When legislation for a Cleveland half dollar came before his committee , Adams struck the entire bill , after the enacting clause , and substituted a new version . The original legislation had given the Cleveland Centennial Commemorative Coin Committee , controlled by <unk> , discretion to have the new piece struck at any of the mints , at any time even over the course of years , in any amount up to the authorized limit of 50 @,@ 000 . Adams 's new text kept the total limit , but set a minimum of 25 @,@ 000 that had to be issued . Adams 's amendment required that all the coins be of a single design , be struck at a single mint ( to be selected by the Director of the Mint ) . It provided that all the coins be dated 1936 even if struck later , and that the Cleveland committee could purchase no less than 5 @,@ 000 at a time . In a separate report , Senator Adams noted that Bulkley 's original bill " contains certain provisions which the committee recommends be eliminated not only from such bill but also from all subsequent bills relating to the issuance of commemorative coins . " 
 The bill , as amended , passed the Senate without recorded vote on March 27 , 1936 . The House of Representatives received the bill on April 1 , and referred it to the Committee on Coinage , Weights , and Measures . It was reported back to the House on April 16 , having been amended to require the Cleveland committee to purchase not less than 25 @,@ 000 coins at one time , eliminating the possibility that the committee could order an initial 5 @,@ 000 and then fail to purchase any more . The full House considered the bill on April 23 , 1936 , with the bill reported by John Joseph Cochran of Missouri as an emergency measure . When he asked for unanimous consent to pass the amended bill , Pennsylvania 's Robert F. Rich asked how many coinage bills were going to be considered and if it would not be possible to consolidate a dozen of them into one bill . Cochran replied that he had consulted with Ohio 's Robert <unk> and been informed that " if we do not get the authority to print the coins now it will be useless " . The following day , Bulkley moved that the Senate concur in the House amendments , which it did , and the bill was signed into law by President Franklin D. Roosevelt on May 5 , 1936 . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 Brenda Putnam , a well @-@ known sculptor , was engaged to design the coin . On May 1 , even before Roosevelt signed the legislation , the Director of the Mint , Nellie Tayloe Ross , sent sketches that had been submitted by Putnam to the Commission of Fine Arts . That commission had been charged by a 1921 executive order by President Warren G. Harding with rendering advisory opinions on the designs of public artworks , including coins . On May 2 , commission chairman Charles Moore responded to Ross , giving preliminary approval , and stating that one of its members would work with Putnam as she prepared the necessary plaster models . That representative was Lee Lawrie , who suggested to Putnam that she use stars to represent the cities of the Great Lakes region . Putnam had placed , on the map on the reverse , sketches of buildings to represent the sites of Chicago , Detroit , Cleveland , Buffalo , and Toronto . When Lawrie wrote to Moore to report this and other progress , Moore joked about the coin having an enlarged star for Cleveland , 
 At funerals I hear read the Scriptures to the effect that " one star <unk> from another in glory " . So I suppose Miss Putnam 's big star for Cleveland refers to the glory rather than the size of the city . Well , as a voter in Detroit I don 't mind , and probably no Chicago person will ever see one of the coins . I am convinced that the whole movement is a coin @-@ collector 's racket that is going on all over the country . 
 Putnam 's models were approved by the commission on June 2 , 1936 . The Medallic Art Company of New York reduced the models to half @-@ dollar sized hubs from which coinage dies could be prepared . 
 = = Design = = 
 Putnam 's obverse features Moses Cleaveland , in a depiction based on the only known portrait of him , by an unknown artist . Surrounding Cleaveland are two lines of inscription , UNITED STATES OF AMERICA * HALF DOLLAR and <unk> <unk> * LIBERTY . The designer 's initials , " PB " are beneath Cleaveland 's head . The reverse shows a map of the Great Lakes region with nine stars to represent its cities : Cleveland , Buffalo , Chicago , Detroit , Duluth , Milwaukee , Rochester , Toledo and Toronto . Cleveland gets the largest star , which is transfixed by a compass . Anthony Swiatek and Walter Breen , in their book on commemoratives , stated that " we have not found documentation , but we suspect that the compass was intended to show Cleveland as the center of industry within a radius of approximately 900 miles " , thus encompassing , the authors suggested , not only the Great Lakes cities represented , but New York , Boston , Washington , and St. Louis . The other inscriptions required by law appear in the upper right of the reverse , and 1836 GREAT <unk> <unk> 1936 <unk> <unk> surround the map 
 Numismatist David <unk> , in his early work on commemoratives , stated , " the design of this issue is pleasing ... the obverse and reverse alike are sharply defined , interesting and not crowded " . Art historian Cornelius Vermeule , in his work on U.S. coins and medals , wrote that the half dollar " manages to combine most of the faults found in the better designs of the 1920 's and 1930 's . " After complaining about the flat design and the large amount of lettering on both sides , Vermeule critiqued , " the bust of Moses Cleaveland can only be described as commonplace , and the view of the Great Lakes , bisected by a large compass , is nothing short of incomprehensible . " Nevertheless , Vermeule suggested that Putnam did the best she could to squeeze the required text onto a half dollar , and she might have done better with fewer words to place . 
 = = Production , distribution , and collecting = = 
 Melish , in his capacity as treasurer of the Cleveland committee , ordered 25 @,@ 000 pieces in July 1936 . They were shipped from the Philadelphia Mint , where they were struck , on July 20 . In addition to those pieces , 15 coins were struck and set aside for inspection and testing at the 1937 meeting of the annual Assay Commission . Melish had arranged for the Philadelphia Mint to place the first 201 struck into individual numbered envelopes ; these were later placed in special cardboard holders , the first by itself and each two thereafter together , with a notarized statement from Melish . 
 The Cleveland Centennial and Great Lakes Exposition opened on June 27 , 1936 , and before it closed on October 4 , some four million people passed through its gates . Located on a 150 @-@ acre ( 61 ha ) site by the shores of Lake Erie , there were artistic and industrial exhibits , as well as the usual amusements . The half dollars were sold at the fairgrounds , at Ohio banks , and by mail order from Melish 's office in Cincinnati . Editor Lee Hewitt commented in the Numismatic Scrapbook , " it seems strange that Mr. Melish , living in Cincinnati , should be the distributor of the Cleveland issue . " The Cincinnati Musical Center coin had quickly sold out , the pieces Melish allowed on the market many times oversubscribed , but for the Cleveland piece , " Melish 's sales strategy had to be very different ; the coins would have to be aimed at the Exposition visitors and the general public at $ 1 @.@ 50 each , not at his own coterie of greedy speculators " . 
 Melish sent form letters to collectors warning that his committee had received offers from speculators to buy the entire issue and suggesting they act quickly to get their orders in . By the end of July , Melish wrote that 24 @,@ 000 pieces had been distributed and that the remaining thousand soon would be . Sales were good enough that in February 1937 , Melish ordered the 25 @,@ 000 pieces which remained from the authorized quantity . In addition to those 25 @,@ 000 coins , 15 more pieces were struck , intended for the 1938 Assay Commission . Because of the legislation , the new pieces resembled the old exactly , including bearing the date " 1936 " . So many were produced that thousands were hoarded by coin dealers . In 1942 , Melish offered 16 @,@ 000 Cleveland Centennial half dollars to prominent dealer Abe <unk> for any advance on face value . <unk> , who would , after Melish 's death , auction his coin collection , declined . 
 In 1941 , the Western Reserve Coin Club of Cleveland celebrated its 20th anniversary by <unk> 100 Cleveland Centennial half dollars with a special design . The Secret Service objected , and many were destroyed . The club made similar markings for its 50th and 75th anniversaries , without government interference . The Cleveland Centennial coin is the most common commemorative of the many different designs struck in 1936 . R.S. Yeoman 's A Guide Book of United States Coins , published in 2015 , lists the issue at between $ 215 and $ 300 , depending on condition . An exceptional specimen sold at auction in 2014 for $ 4 @,@ 700 . 
 = Richard Roma = 
 Richard Roma is a fictional character from David Mamet 's 1982 play Glengarry Glen Ross and its 1992 film adaptation . Roma has been portrayed by a range of actors , including Joe Mantegna , Al Pacino and Liev Schreiber , although the role was originated by Jack Shepherd . 
 Actors portraying Roma have seen multiple stage award wins and nominations — both Mantegna and Schreiber received a Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play for their depictions , while Shepherd earned a Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actor for his portrayal . In film , Pacino received nominations for both the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor and the Golden Globe for Best Performance by an Actor In A Supporting Role in a Motion Picture . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 Roma , along with the rest of the salesmen in Glengarry Glen Ross , was written based on playwright David Mamet 's previous experiences selling " worthless " Arizona real estate from an office in Chicago . Mamet described the colorful dialogue used by the character — which has also been described as " following in the steps of " Arthur Miller 's Death of a Salesman — as having been influenced by overheard conversations and street slang . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Richard Roma is a cut @-@ throat and successful real estate salesman , who derives his success from eloquent and convincing pitches , preying on insecure clients with illusions of power and machismo . During the events of Glengarry Glen Ross , Roma is in contention for a prize to be awarded to the top " closer " at his firm , having just closed a large sale with a man called Lingk . Overnight , the firm 's office is burgled , and lucrative leads for top real estate are stolen . Lingk arrives at the office during the investigation , eager to cancel his purchase during his cooling @-@ off period . Roma attempts to distract Lingk from doing so in the hope that this period will pass , trapping Lingk in the sale , but well @-@ intentioned comments by the firm 's manager , trying to play along , catch Roma in a lie , and Lingk demands a refund on his purchase . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Character = = = 
 Writing for The New York Times , Mickey Rapkin considered Roma to be the central character of the play , describing him as " the salesman ’ s salesman , a shark in a <unk> suit " . Mantegna has stated that he feels Roma is not a " sleazy " character , but simply a man who can convince customers to follow through on their dreams . Reviewing a 2012 revival at the La Jolla Playhouse , Charles McNulty of the Los Angeles Times compared Roma to a Giacomo Casanova @-@ type figure , adding that " when Roma puts the moves on a prospective buyer , it 's as though he 's making love to them " . While interviewing actor Aidan Gillen , The Guardian 's Mark Lawson felt that Roma was an amoral character , considering him a " super @-@ <unk> " . Gillen , then portraying the character in the Apollo Theatre in London , described him as a " cunt with a romantic , poetic streak " . 
 = = = Depictions = = = 
 Portrayals of Roma have often been received positively by critics . Schreiber 's portrayal in the 2005 Broadway revival was praised as that of " a most crafty spider indeed " , with the actor 's grasp of the character 's Chicago accent praised for its subtlety . Gillen 's 2007 turn as Roma has been described as " sweaty and aggressive with a hard , rodent @-@ like quality " , with reviewer Lyn Gardner of The Guardian finding the performance excellent . Manu Narayan 's 2012 depiction was described as " adding velocity " to a " high testosterone " production , coming across as rhythmic and an effective focal point in the piece . Reviewing the 1992 film version , Roger Ebert praised Pacino 's acting , writing " any kid can play a war hero . But it takes a real man to play a busted @-@ down real estate salesman " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Shepherd 's original performance as Roma earned the actor a Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actor in 1983 . On Broadway , both Mantegna and Schreiber have won the Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play while portraying Roma — Mantegna at the 38th Tony Awards in 1984 , and Schreiber at the 59th Tony Awards in 2005 . Pacino 's role in the film adaptation earned him several unsuccessful nominations , including the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor and the Golden Globe for Best Performance by an Actor In A Supporting Role in a Motion Picture , both times losing out to Gene Hackman in Unforgiven 
 = Poliomyelitis = 
 Poliomyelitis , often called polio or infantile paralysis , is an infectious disease caused by the poliovirus . In about 0 @.@ 5 % of cases there is muscle weakness resulting in an inability to move . This can occur over a few hours to few days . The weakness most often involves the legs but may less commonly involve the muscles of the head , neck and diaphragm . Many but not all people fully recover . In those with muscle weakness about 2 % to 5 % of children and 15 % to 30 % of adults die . Another 25 % of people have minor symptoms such as fever and a sore throat and up to 5 % have headache , neck stiffness and pains in the arms and legs . These people are usually back to normal within one or two weeks . In up to 70 % of infections there are no symptoms . Years after recovery post @-@ polio syndrome may occur , with a slow development of muscle weakness similar to that which the person had during the initial infection . 
 Poliovirus is usually spread from person to person through infected fecal matter entering the mouth . It may also be spread by food or water containing human feces and less commonly from infected saliva . Those who are infected may spread the disease for up to six weeks even if no symptoms are present . The disease may be diagnosed by finding the virus in the feces or detecting antibodies against it in the blood . The disease only occurs naturally in humans . 
 The disease is preventable with the polio vaccine ; however , a number of doses are required for it to be effective . The United States Center for Disease Control recommends polio vaccination boosters for travelers and those who live in countries where the disease is occurring . Once infected there is no specific treatment . In 2015 polio affected less than 100 people down from 350 @,@ 000 cases in 1988 . In 2014 the disease was only spreading between people in Afghanistan , Nigeria , and Pakistan . In 2015 Nigeria had stopped the spread of wild poliovirus . 
 Poliomyelitis has existed for thousands of years , with depictions of the disease in ancient art . The disease was first recognized as a distinct condition by Michael Underwood in 1789 and the virus that causes it was first identified in 1908 by Karl <unk> . Major outbreaks started to occur in the late 19th century in Europe and the United States . In the 20th century it became one of the most worrying childhood diseases in these areas . The first polio vaccine was developed in the 1950s by Jonas Salk . It is hoped that vaccination efforts and early detection of cases will result in global eradication of the disease by 2018 . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The term " poliomyelitis " is used to identify the disease caused by any of the three serotypes of poliovirus . Two basic patterns of polio infection are described : a minor illness which does not involve the central nervous system ( CNS ) , sometimes called abortive poliomyelitis , and a major illness involving the CNS , which may be paralytic or nonparalytic . In most people with a normal immune system , a poliovirus infection is asymptomatic . Rarely , the infection produces minor symptoms ; these may include upper respiratory tract infection ( sore throat and fever ) , gastrointestinal disturbances ( nausea , vomiting , abdominal pain , constipation or , rarely , diarrhea ) , and influenza @-@ like illness . 
 The virus enters the central nervous system in about 1 % of infections . Most patients with CNS involvement develop nonparalytic aseptic meningitis , with symptoms of headache , neck , back , abdominal and extremity pain , fever , vomiting , lethargy , and irritability . About one to five in 1000 cases progress to paralytic disease , in which the muscles become weak , floppy and poorly controlled , and , finally , completely paralyzed ; this condition is known as acute flaccid paralysis . Depending on the site of paralysis , paralytic poliomyelitis is classified as spinal , bulbar , or bulbospinal . Encephalitis , an infection of the brain tissue itself , can occur in rare cases , and is usually restricted to infants . It is characterized by confusion , changes in mental status , headaches , fever , and , less commonly , seizures and spastic paralysis . 
 = = Cause = = 
 Poliomyelitis is caused by infection with a member of the genus Enterovirus known as poliovirus ( PV ) . This group of RNA viruses colonize the gastrointestinal tract — specifically the oropharynx and the intestine . The incubation time ( to the first signs and symptoms ) ranges from three to 35 days , with a more common span of six to 20 days . PV infects and causes disease in humans alone . Its structure is very simple , composed of a single ( + ) sense RNA genome enclosed in a protein shell called a capsid . In addition to protecting the virus ’ s genetic material , the capsid proteins enable poliovirus to infect certain types of cells . Three serotypes of poliovirus have been identified — poliovirus type 1 ( PV1 ) , type 2 ( PV2 ) , and type 3 ( PV3 ) — each with a slightly different capsid protein . All three are extremely virulent and produce the same disease symptoms . PV1 is the most commonly encountered form , and the one most closely associated with paralysis . 
 Individuals who are exposed to the virus , either through infection or by immunization with polio vaccine , develop immunity . In immune individuals , IgA antibodies against poliovirus are present in the tonsils and gastrointestinal tract , and are able to block virus replication ; IgG and IgM antibodies against PV can prevent the spread of the virus to motor neurons of the central nervous system . Infection or vaccination with one serotype of poliovirus does not provide immunity against the other serotypes , and full immunity requires exposure to each serotype . 
 A rare condition with a similar presentation , <unk> poliomyelitis , may result from infections with <unk> enteroviruses . 
 = = = Transmission = = = 
 Poliomyelitis is highly contagious via the fecal @-@ oral ( intestinal source ) and the oral @-@ oral ( oropharyngeal source ) routes . In endemic areas , wild polioviruses can infect virtually the entire human population . It is seasonal in temperate climates , with peak transmission occurring in summer and autumn . These seasonal differences are far less pronounced in tropical areas . The time between first exposure and first symptoms , known as the incubation period , is usually 6 to 20 days , with a maximum range of three to 35 days . Virus particles are excreted in the feces for several weeks following initial infection . The disease is transmitted primarily via the fecal @-@ oral route , by ingesting contaminated food or water . It is occasionally transmitted via the oral @-@ oral route , a mode especially visible in areas with good sanitation and hygiene . Polio is most infectious between seven and 10 days before and after the appearance of symptoms , but transmission is possible as long as the virus remains in the saliva or feces . 
 Factors that increase the risk of polio infection or affect the severity of the disease include immune deficiency , malnutrition , physical activity immediately following the onset of paralysis , skeletal muscle injury due to injection of vaccines or therapeutic agents , and pregnancy . Although the virus can cross the maternal @-@ fetal barrier during pregnancy , the fetus does not appear to be affected by either maternal infection or polio vaccination . Maternal antibodies also cross the placenta , providing passive immunity that protects the infant from polio infection during the first few months of life . 
 As a precaution against infection , public swimming pools were often closed in affected areas during poliomyelitis epidemics . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 Poliovirus enters the body through the mouth , infecting the first cells with which it comes in contact — the pharynx and intestinal mucosa . It gains entry by binding to an immunoglobulin @-@ like receptor , known as the poliovirus receptor or CD155 , on the cell membrane . The virus then hijacks the host cell 's own machinery , and begins to replicate . Poliovirus divides within gastrointestinal cells for about a week , from where it spreads to the tonsils ( specifically the follicular dendritic cells residing within the <unk> germinal centers ) , the intestinal lymphoid tissue including the M cells of Peyer 's patches , and the deep cervical and mesenteric lymph nodes , where it multiplies abundantly . The virus is subsequently absorbed into the bloodstream . 
 Known as viremia , the presence of a virus in the bloodstream enables it to be widely distributed throughout the body . Poliovirus can survive and multiply within the blood and <unk> for long periods of time , sometimes as long as 17 weeks . In a small percentage of cases , it can spread and replicate in other sites , such as brown fat , the reticuloendothelial tissues , and muscle . This sustained replication causes a major viremia , and leads to the development of minor influenza @-@ like symptoms . Rarely , this may progress and the virus may invade the central nervous system , provoking a local inflammatory response . In most cases , this causes a self @-@ limiting inflammation of the meninges , the layers of tissue surrounding the brain , which is known as nonparalytic aseptic meningitis . Penetration of the CNS provides no known benefit to the virus , and is quite possibly an incidental deviation of a normal gastrointestinal infection . The mechanisms by which poliovirus spreads to the CNS are poorly understood , but it appears to be primarily a chance event — largely independent of the age , gender , or socioeconomic position of the individual . 
 = = = Paralytic polio = = = 
 In around 1 % of infections , poliovirus spreads along certain nerve fiber pathways , preferentially replicating in and destroying motor neurons within the spinal cord , brain stem , or motor cortex . This leads to the development of paralytic poliomyelitis , the various forms of which ( spinal , bulbar , and bulbospinal ) vary only with the amount of neuronal damage and inflammation that occurs , and the region of the CNS affected . 
 The destruction of neuronal cells produces lesions within the spinal ganglia ; these may also occur in the reticular formation , vestibular nuclei , cerebellar vermis , and deep cerebellar nuclei . Inflammation associated with nerve cell destruction often alters the color and appearance of the gray matter in the spinal column , causing it to appear reddish and swollen . Other destructive changes associated with paralytic disease occur in the forebrain region , specifically the hypothalamus and thalamus . The molecular mechanisms by which poliovirus causes paralytic disease are poorly understood . 
 Early symptoms of paralytic polio include high fever , headache , stiffness in the back and neck , asymmetrical weakness of various muscles , sensitivity to touch , difficulty swallowing , muscle pain , loss of superficial and deep reflexes , paresthesia ( pins and needles ) , irritability , constipation , or difficulty urinating . Paralysis generally develops one to ten days after early symptoms begin , progresses for two to three days , and is usually complete by the time the fever breaks . 
 The likelihood of developing paralytic polio increases with age , as does the extent of paralysis . In children , nonparalytic meningitis is the most likely consequence of CNS involvement , and paralysis occurs in only one in 1000 cases . In adults , paralysis occurs in one in 75 cases . In children under five years of age , paralysis of one leg is most common ; in adults , extensive paralysis of the chest and abdomen also affecting all four limbs — quadriplegia — is more likely . Paralysis rates also vary depending on the serotype of the infecting poliovirus ; the highest rates of paralysis ( one in 200 ) are associated with poliovirus type 1 , the lowest rates ( one in 2 @,@ 000 ) are associated with type 2 . 
 = = = = Spinal polio = = = = 
 Spinal polio , the most common form of paralytic poliomyelitis , results from viral invasion of the motor neurons of the anterior horn cells , or the ventral ( front ) grey matter section in the spinal column , which are responsible for movement of the muscles , including those of the trunk , limbs , and the intercostal muscles . Virus invasion causes inflammation of the nerve cells , leading to damage or destruction of motor neuron ganglia . When spinal neurons die , <unk> degeneration takes place , leading to weakness of those muscles formerly innervated by the now @-@ dead neurons . With the destruction of nerve cells , the muscles no longer receive signals from the brain or spinal cord ; without nerve stimulation , the muscles atrophy , becoming weak , floppy and poorly controlled , and finally completely paralyzed . Maximum paralysis progresses rapidly ( two to four days ) , and usually involves fever and muscle pain . Deep tendon reflexes are also affected , and are typically absent or diminished ; sensation ( the ability to feel ) in the paralyzed limbs , however , is not affected . 
 The extent of spinal paralysis depends on the region of the cord affected , which may be cervical , thoracic , or lumbar . The virus may affect muscles on both sides of the body , but more often the paralysis is asymmetrical . Any limb or combination of limbs may be affected — one leg , one arm , or both legs and both arms . Paralysis is often more severe proximally ( where the limb joins the body ) than distally ( the fingertips and toes ) . 
 = = = = <unk> polio = = = = 
 Making up about 2 % of cases of paralytic polio , bulbar polio occurs when poliovirus invades and destroys nerves within the bulbar region of the brain stem . The bulbar region is a white matter pathway that connects the cerebral cortex to the brain stem . The destruction of these nerves weakens the muscles supplied by the cranial nerves , producing symptoms of encephalitis , and causes difficulty breathing , speaking and swallowing . Critical nerves affected are the glossopharyngeal nerve ( which partially controls swallowing and functions in the throat , tongue movement , and taste ) , the vagus nerve ( which sends signals to the heart , intestines , and lungs ) , and the accessory nerve ( which controls upper neck movement ) . Due to the effect on swallowing , secretions of mucus may build up in the airway , causing suffocation . Other signs and symptoms include facial weakness ( caused by destruction of the trigeminal nerve and facial nerve , which innervate the cheeks , tear ducts , gums , and muscles of the face , among other structures ) , double vision , difficulty in chewing , and abnormal respiratory rate , depth , and rhythm ( which may lead to respiratory arrest ) . Pulmonary edema and shock are also possible and may be fatal . 
 = = = = <unk> polio = = = = 
 Approximately 19 % of all paralytic polio cases have both bulbar and spinal symptoms ; this subtype is called respiratory or bulbospinal polio . Here , the virus affects the upper part of the cervical spinal cord ( cervical vertebrae C3 through C5 ) , and paralysis of the diaphragm occurs . The critical nerves affected are the phrenic nerve ( which drives the diaphragm to inflate the lungs ) and those that drive the muscles needed for swallowing . By destroying these nerves , this form of polio affects breathing , making it difficult or impossible for the patient to breathe without the support of a ventilator . It can lead to paralysis of the arms and legs and may also affect swallowing and heart functions . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Paralytic poliomyelitis may be clinically suspected in individuals experiencing acute onset of flaccid paralysis in one or more limbs with decreased or absent tendon reflexes in the affected limbs that cannot be attributed to another apparent cause , and without sensory or cognitive loss . 
 A laboratory diagnosis is usually made based on recovery of poliovirus from a stool sample or a swab of the pharynx . Antibodies to poliovirus can be diagnostic , and are generally detected in the blood of infected patients early in the course of infection . Analysis of the patient 's cerebrospinal fluid ( CSF ) , which is collected by a lumbar puncture ( " spinal tap " ) , reveals an increased number of white blood cells ( primarily lymphocytes ) and a mildly elevated protein level . Detection of virus in the CSF is diagnostic of paralytic polio , but rarely occurs . 
 If poliovirus is isolated from a patient experiencing acute flaccid paralysis , it is further tested through oligonucleotide mapping ( genetic fingerprinting ) , or more recently by PCR amplification , to determine whether it is " wild type " ( that is , the virus encountered in nature ) or " vaccine type " ( derived from a strain of poliovirus used to produce polio vaccine ) . It is important to determine the source of the virus because for each reported case of paralytic polio caused by wild poliovirus , an estimated 200 to 3 @,@ 000 other contagious asymptomatic carriers exist . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 = = = Passive immunization = = = 
 In 1950 , William Hammon at the University of Pittsburgh purified the gamma globulin component of the blood plasma of polio survivors . Hammon proposed the gamma globulin , which contained antibodies to poliovirus , could be used to halt poliovirus infection , prevent disease , and reduce the severity of disease in other patients who had contracted polio . The results of a large clinical trial were promising ; the gamma globulin was shown to be about 80 % effective in preventing the development of paralytic poliomyelitis . It was also shown to reduce the severity of the disease in patients who developed polio . Due to the limited supply of blood plasma gamma globulin was later deemed impractical for widespread use and the medical community focused on the development of a polio vaccine . 
 = = = Vaccine = = = 
 Two types of vaccine are used throughout the world to combat polio . Both types induce immunity to polio , efficiently blocking person @-@ to @-@ person transmission of wild poliovirus , thereby protecting both individual vaccine recipients and the wider community ( so @-@ called herd immunity ) . 
 The first candidate polio vaccine , based on one serotype of a live but attenuated ( weakened ) virus , was developed by the virologist Hilary Koprowski . Koprowski 's prototype vaccine was given to an eight @-@ year @-@ old boy on 27 February 1950 . Koprowski continued to work on the vaccine throughout the 1950s , leading to large @-@ scale trials in the then Belgian Congo and the vaccination of seven million children in Poland against serotypes PV1 and PV3 between 1958 and 1960 . 
 The second inactivated virus vaccine was developed in 1952 by Jonas Salk at the University of Pittsburgh , and announced to the world on 12 April 1955 . The Salk vaccine , or inactivated poliovirus vaccine ( IPV ) , is based on poliovirus grown in a type of monkey kidney tissue culture ( vero cell line ) , which is chemically inactivated with formalin . After two doses of IPV ( given by injection ) , 90 % or more of individuals develop protective antibody to all three serotypes of poliovirus , and at least 99 % are immune to poliovirus following three doses . 
 Subsequently , Albert Sabin developed another live , oral polio vaccine ( OPV ) . It was produced by the repeated passage of the virus through nonhuman cells at <unk> temperatures . The attenuated poliovirus in the Sabin vaccine replicates very efficiently in the gut , the primary site of wild poliovirus infection and replication , but the vaccine strain is unable to replicate efficiently within nervous system tissue . A single dose of Sabin 's oral polio vaccine produces immunity to all three poliovirus serotypes in about 50 % of recipients . Three doses of live @-@ attenuated OPV produce protective antibody to all three poliovirus types in more than 95 % of recipients . Human trials of Sabin 's vaccine began in 1957 , and in 1958 it was selected , in competition with the live vaccines of Koprowski and other researchers , by the US National Institutes of Health . Licensed in 1962 , it rapidly became the only polio vaccine used worldwide . 
 Because OPV is inexpensive , easy to administer , and produces excellent immunity in the intestine ( which helps prevent infection with wild virus in areas where it is endemic ) , it has been the vaccine of choice for controlling poliomyelitis in many countries . On very rare occasions ( about one case per 750 @,@ 000 vaccine recipients ) , the attenuated virus in OPV reverts into a form that can paralyze . Most industrialized countries have switched to IPV , which cannot revert , either as the sole vaccine against poliomyelitis or in combination with oral polio vaccine . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 There is no cure for polio . The focus of modern treatment has been on providing relief of symptoms , speeding recovery and preventing complications . Supportive measures include antibiotics to prevent infections in weakened muscles , analgesics for pain , moderate exercise and a nutritious diet . Treatment of polio often requires long @-@ term rehabilitation , including occupational therapy , physical therapy , braces , corrective shoes and , in some cases , orthopedic surgery . 
 Portable ventilators may be required to support breathing . Historically , a noninvasive , negative @-@ pressure ventilator , more commonly called an iron lung , was used to artificially maintain respiration during an acute polio infection until a person could breathe independently ( generally about one to two weeks ) . Today , many polio survivors with permanent respiratory paralysis use modern jacket @-@ type negative @-@ pressure ventilators worn over the chest and abdomen . 
 Other historical treatments for polio include hydrotherapy , electrotherapy , massage and passive motion exercises , and surgical treatments , such as tendon lengthening and nerve grafting . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Patients with abortive polio infections recover completely . In those who develop only aseptic meningitis , the symptoms can be expected to persist for two to ten days , followed by complete recovery . In cases of spinal polio , if the affected nerve cells are completely destroyed , paralysis will be permanent ; cells that are not destroyed , but lose function temporarily , may recover within four to six weeks after onset . Half the patients with spinal polio recover fully ; one @-@ quarter recover with mild disability , and the remaining quarter are left with severe disability . The degree of both acute paralysis and residual paralysis is likely to be proportional to the degree of viremia , and inversely proportional to the degree of immunity . Spinal polio is rarely fatal . 
 Without respiratory support , consequences of poliomyelitis with respiratory involvement include suffocation or pneumonia from aspiration of secretions . Overall , 5 – 10 % of patients with paralytic polio die due to the paralysis of muscles used for breathing . The case fatality rate ( CFR ) varies by age : 2 – 5 % of children and up to 15 – 30 % of adults die . <unk> polio often causes death if respiratory support is not provided ; with support , its CFR ranges from 25 to 75 % , depending on the age of the patient . When intermittent positive pressure ventilation is available , the fatalities can be reduced to 15 % . 
 = = = Recovery = = = 
 Many cases of poliomyelitis result in only temporary paralysis . Nerve impulses return to the formerly paralyzed muscle within a month , and recovery is usually complete in six to eight months . The neurophysiological processes involved in recovery following acute paralytic poliomyelitis are quite effective ; muscles are able to retain normal strength even if half the original motor neurons have been lost . Paralysis remaining after one year is likely to be permanent , although modest recoveries of muscle strength are possible 12 to 18 months after infection . 
 One mechanism involved in recovery is nerve terminal sprouting , in which remaining brainstem and spinal cord motor neurons develop new branches , or axonal sprouts . These sprouts can <unk> orphaned muscle fibers that have been <unk> by acute polio infection , restoring the fibers ' capacity to contract and improving strength . Terminal sprouting may generate a few significantly enlarged motor neurons doing work previously performed by as many as four or five units : a single motor neuron that once controlled 200 muscle cells might control 800 to 1000 cells . Other mechanisms that occur during the rehabilitation phase , and contribute to muscle strength restoration , include <unk> hypertrophy — enlargement of muscle fibers through exercise and activity — and transformation of type II muscle fibers to type I muscle fibers . 
 In addition to these physiological processes , the body possesses a number of compensatory mechanisms to maintain function in the presence of residual paralysis . These include the use of weaker muscles at a higher than usual intensity relative to the muscle 's maximal capacity , enhancing athletic development of previously little @-@ used muscles , and using ligaments for stability , which enables greater mobility . 
 = = = Complications = = = 
 Residual complications of paralytic polio often occur following the initial recovery process . Muscle paresis and paralysis can sometimes result in skeletal deformities , tightening of the joints and movement disability . Once the muscles in the limb become flaccid , they may interfere with the function of other muscles . A typical manifestation of this problem is equinus foot ( similar to club foot ) . This deformity develops when the muscles that pull the toes downward are working , but those that pull it upward are not , and the foot naturally tends to drop toward the ground . If the problem is left untreated , the Achilles tendons at the back of the foot retract and the foot cannot take on a normal position . Polio victims that develop equinus foot cannot walk properly because they cannot put their heel on the ground . A similar situation can develop if the arms become paralyzed . In some cases the growth of an affected leg is slowed by polio , while the other leg continues to grow normally . The result is that one leg is shorter than the other and the person limps and leans to one side , in turn leading to deformities of the spine ( such as scoliosis ) . <unk> and increased likelihood of bone fractures may occur . An intervention to prevent or lessen length disparity can be to perform an <unk> on the distal femoral and proximal tibial / fibular condyles , so that limb 's growth is artificially stunted , and by the time of epiphyseal ( growth ) plate closure , the legs are more equal in length . Alternatively , a person can be fitted with custom made footwear which corrects the difference in leg lengths . Other surgery to re @-@ balance muscular agonist / antagonist imbalances may also be helpful . Extended use of braces or wheelchairs may cause compression neuropathy , as well as a loss of proper function of the veins in the legs , due to pooling of blood in paralyzed lower limbs . Complications from prolonged immobility involving the lungs , kidneys and heart include pulmonary edema , aspiration pneumonia , urinary tract infections , kidney stones , paralytic <unk> , myocarditis and cor pulmonale . 
 = = = Post @-@ polio syndrome = = = 
 Between 25 % and 50 % of individuals who have recovered from paralytic polio in childhood can develop additional symptoms decades after recovering from the acute infection , notably new muscle weakness and extreme fatigue . This condition is known as post @-@ polio syndrome ( PPS ) or post @-@ polio sequelae . The symptoms of PPS are thought to involve a failure of the oversized motor units created during the recovery phase of the paralytic disease . Contributing factors that increase the risk of PPS include aging with loss of neuron units , the presence of a permanent residual impairment after recovery from the acute illness , and both overuse and disuse of neurons . PPS is a slow , progressive disease , and there is no specific treatment for it . Post @-@ polio syndrome is not an infectious process , and persons experiencing the syndrome do not shed poliovirus . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Following the widespread use of poliovirus vaccine in the mid @-@ 1950s , the incidence of poliomyelitis declined dramatically in many industrialized countries . A global effort to eradicate polio began in 1988 , led by the World Health Organization , UNICEF , and The Rotary Foundation . These efforts have reduced the number of annual diagnosed cases by 99 @.@ 9 % ; from an estimated 350 @,@ 000 cases in 1988 to a low of 483 cases in 2001 , after which it remained at a level of about 1 @,@ 000 - 2000 cases per year for a number of years . In 2015 , cases decreased to 98 . Polio is one of only two diseases currently the subject of a global eradication program , the other being Guinea worm disease . So far , the only diseases completely eradicated by humankind are smallpox , declared so , in 1980 , and rinderpest , likewise , in 2011 . A number of eradication milestones have already been reached , and several regions of the world have been certified polio @-@ free . 
 A concern is the presence of circulating vaccine @-@ derived polioviruses ( cVDPV ) . The OPV is not perfect : while the genetic characteristics are carefully balanced to maximize efficacy and minimize virulence , it is possible for the OPV to mutate . As a result , persons given the OPV can acquire acute or chronic infections ; or can transmit ( circulate ) mutated OPV to other people . It is likely that cVDPV cases will exceed wild cases in the near future , making it desirable to discontinue use of the OPV as soon as safely possible . 
 = = = Emergency declaration = = = 
 In April 2012 , the World Health Assembly declared the completion of polio eradication a programmatic emergency for global public health . 
 = = = Americas = = = 
 The Americas were declared polio @-@ free in 1994 . 
 = = = Western Pacific = = = 
 In 2000 polio was declared to have been officially eliminated in 37 Western Pacific countries , including China and Australia . 
 Despite eradication ten years prior , an outbreak was confirmed in China in September 2011 involving a strain prevalent in neighboring Pakistan . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 Europe was declared polio @-@ free in 2002 . On 1 September , 2015 WHO confirmed 2 cases of circulating vaccine @-@ derived poliovirus type 1 in Ukraine . 
 = = = South @-@ East Asia = = = 
 The last case of polio in the region was in India in January 2011 . Since January 2011 , there have been no reported cases of the wild polio infections in India , and in February 2012 the country was taken off the WHO list of polio endemic countries . It was reported that if there are no cases of wild polio in the country for two more years , it would be declared as a polio @-@ free country . 
 On March 27 , 2014 the WHO announced the eradication of poliomyelitis in the South @-@ East Asia Region , which includes eleven countries : Bangladesh , Bhutan , North Korea , India , Indonesia , Maldives , Myanmar , Nepal , Sri Lanka , Thailand and Timor @-@ Leste . With the addition of this region , 80 per cent of the world population lives in polio @-@ free regions . 
 = = = Syria = = = 
 In 2015 , polio was believed to remain naturally spreading in only two countries : Pakistan , and Afghanistan , although it continued to cause epidemics in other nearby countries due to hidden or reestablished transmission . 
 In Syria difficulties in executing immunization programs in the ongoing civil war led to a return of polio , probably in 2012 , acknowledged by the WHO in 2013 . 15 cases were confirmed among children in Syria between October and November 2013 in Deir <unk> . Later , two more cases , each one in rural Damascus and Aleppo , were identified . It was the first outbreak in Syria since 1999 . Doctors and international public health agencies report more than 90 cases of polio in Syria , with fears of contagion in rebel areas from lack of sanitation and safe @-@ water services . In May 2014 , the World Health Organization declared polio 's renewed spread a world health emergency . 
 A vaccination campaign in Syria operated literally under fire and lead to the deaths of several vaccinators , but returned vaccination coverage to pre @-@ war levels . No new cases have been reported since January 2014 ; vaccination continues , and Iraq is also being closely monitored . 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 In 2003 in northern Nigeria — a country which at that time was considered provisionally polio free — a fatwa was issued declaring that the polio vaccine was designed to render children sterile . Subsequently , polio reappeared in Nigeria and spread from there to several other countries . In 2013 , nine health workers administering polio vaccine were targeted and killed by gunmen on motorcycles in Kano , but this was the first and last attack . Local traditional and religious leaders and polio survivors worked to revive the campaign , and Nigeria has not had a polio case since July 24 , 2014 . In September 2015 , Nigeria is removed from polio @-@ endemic list . If no new cases appear , it will be declared polio @-@ free in 2017 . 
 In 2013 the Center for Disease Control received reports of 183 cases of polio in Somalia , 14 in Kenya and 8 cases in the Somali Region of Ethiopia , but Africa had no confirmed cases of wild poliovirus ( <unk> ) in 2015 . A case of circulating vaccine @-@ derived poliovirus ( cVDPV ) type 2 was detected in <unk> in Guinea 's <unk> region , in August 2014 . In September 2015 , a case of cVDPV in Mali was confirmed by the WHO . 
 = = = Afghanistan and Pakistan = = = 
 This is the last remaining region with wild polio cases . Both major sides of the Afghan civil war support polio vaccination and polio rates are declining rapidly in Afghanistan , with only 19 cases in 2015 . 
 In Pakistan there were 53 cases in 2015 , the highest number for any country . Vaccination in Pakistan is hindered by conflict and organizational problems . The militant Pakistani Taliban claims vaccination is a Western plot to sterilise local children . 66 vaccinators were killed in 2013 and 2014 . Cases have dropped by 70 % in 2015 ; reasons include <unk> million support from the United Arab Emirates to vaccinate more than ten million children , changes in the military situation , and arrests of some of those who attacked polio workers . 
 = = History = = 
 The effects of polio have been known since prehistory ; Egyptian paintings and carvings depict otherwise healthy people with withered limbs , and children walking with canes at a young age . The first clinical description was provided by the English physician Michael Underwood in 1789 , where he refers to polio as " a debility of the lower extremities " . The work of physicians Jakob Heine in 1840 and Karl Oskar Medin in 1890 led to it being known as Heine – Medin disease . The disease was later called infantile paralysis , based on its propensity to affect children . 
 Before the 20th century , polio infections were rarely seen in infants before six months of age , most cases occurring in children six months to four years of age . Poorer sanitation of the time resulted in a constant exposure to the virus , which enhanced a natural immunity within the population . In developed countries during the late 19th and early 20th centuries , improvements were made in community sanitation , including better sewage disposal and clean water supplies . These changes drastically increased the proportion of children and adults at risk of paralytic polio infection , by reducing childhood exposure and immunity to the disease . 
 Small localized paralytic polio epidemics began to appear in Europe and the United States around 1900 . Outbreaks reached pandemic proportions in Europe , North America , Australia , and New Zealand during the first half of the 20th century . By 1950 the peak age incidence of paralytic poliomyelitis in the United States had shifted from infants to children aged five to nine years , when the risk of paralysis is greater ; about one @-@ third of the cases were reported in persons over 15 years of age . Accordingly , the rate of paralysis and death due to polio infection also increased during this time . In the United States , the 1952 polio epidemic became the worst outbreak in the nation 's history . Of nearly 58 @,@ 000 cases reported that year 3 @,@ 145 died and 21 @,@ 269 were left with mild to disabling paralysis . Intensive care medicine has its origin in the fight against polio . Most hospitals in the 1950s had limited access to iron lungs for patients unable to breathe without mechanical assistance . Respiratory centers designed to assist the most severe polio patients , first established in 1952 at the <unk> Hospital of Copenhagen by Danish anesthesiologist Bjørn Ibsen , were the harbingers of subsequent intensive care units ( ICU ) . ( A year later , Ibsen would establish the world 's first dedicated ICU . ) 
 The polio epidemics not only altered the lives of those who survived them , but also brought profound cultural changes , spurring grassroots fund @-@ raising campaigns that would revolutionize medical philanthropy , and giving rise to the modern field of rehabilitation therapy . As one of the largest disabled groups in the world , polio survivors also helped to advance the modern disability rights movement through campaigns for the social and civil rights of the disabled . The World Health Organization estimates that there are 10 to 20 million polio survivors worldwide . In 1977 there were 254 @,@ 000 persons living in the United States who had been paralyzed by polio . According to doctors and local polio support groups , some 40 @,@ 000 polio survivors with varying degrees of paralysis live in Germany , 30 @,@ 000 in Japan , 24 @,@ 000 in France , 16 @,@ 000 in Australia , 12 @,@ 000 in Canada and 12 @,@ 000 in the United Kingdom . Many notable individuals have survived polio and often credit the prolonged immobility and residual paralysis associated with polio as a driving force in their lives and careers . 
 The disease was very well publicized during the polio epidemics of the 1950s , with extensive media coverage of any scientific advancements that might lead to a cure . Thus , the scientists working on polio became some of the most famous of the century . Fifteen scientists and two laymen who made important contributions to the knowledge and treatment of poliomyelitis are honored by the Polio Hall of Fame , which was dedicated in 1957 at the Roosevelt Warm Springs Institute for Rehabilitation in Warm Springs , Georgia , US . In 2008 four organizations ( Rotary International , the World Health Organization , the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and UNICEF ) were added to the Hall of Fame . 
 World Polio Day ( 24 October ) was established by Rotary International to commemorate the birth of Jonas Salk , who led the first team to develop a vaccine against poliomyelitis . Use of this inactivated poliovirus vaccine and subsequent widespread use of the oral poliovirus vaccine developed by Albert Sabin led to establishment of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative ( <unk> ) in 1988 . Since then , <unk> has reduced polio worldwide by 99 % . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The term derives from the Ancient Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning " grey " , <unk> ( <unk> “ marrow ” ) , referring to the grey matter of the spinal cord , and the suffix -itis , which denotes inflammation . , i.e. , inflammation of the spinal cord ’ s grey matter , although a severe infection can extend into the brainstem and even higher structures , resulting in <unk> , producing a lack of ability to breathe that requires mechanical assistance such as an iron lung . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = Padma Vibhushan = 
 The Padma Vibhushan is the second @-@ highest civilian award of the Republic of India , preceded by Bharat Ratna and followed by Padma Bhushan . Instituted on 2 January 1954 , the award is given for " exceptional and distinguished service " , without distinction of race , occupation , position , or sex . The award criteria include " service in any field including service rendered by Government servants " including doctors and scientists , but excludes those working with the public sector undertakings . As of 2016 , the award has been bestowed on 294 individuals , including 6 posthumous and 19 non @-@ citizen recipients . 
 During 1 May and 15 September of every year , the recommendations for the award are submitted to the Padma Awards Committee , constituted by the Prime Minister of India . The recommendations are received from all the state and the union territory governments , the Ministries of the Government of India , the Bharat Ratna and previous Padma Vibhushan award recipients , the Institutes of Excellence , the Ministers , the Chief Ministers and the Governors of State , and the Members of Parliament including private individuals . The committee later submits their recommendations to the Prime Minister and the President of India for the further approval . The award recipients are announced on Republic Day . 
 The first recipients of the award were Satyendra Nath Bose , Nand Lal Bose , Zakir Hussain , Balasaheb Gangadhar Kher , Jigme Dorji Wangchuk , and V. K. Krishna Menon , who were honoured in 1954 . The 1954 statutes did not allow posthumous awards but this was subsequently modified in the January 1955 statute . The " Padma Vibhushan " , along with other personal civil honours , was briefly suspended twice , from July 1977 to January 1980 and from August 1992 to December 1995 . Some of the recipients have refused or returned their conferments . Vilayat Khan , Swami <unk> , and <unk> Chalapathi Rau refused the award , Lakshmi Chand Jain 's family declined the 2011 posthumous conferment , and Baba Amte returned his 1986 conferment in 1991 . On 25 January 2016 , the award was conferred upon ten recipients , including one non @-@ citizen recipient : V. K. <unk> , Girija Devi , Avinash Dixit , Jagmohan , <unk> Krishnamurthy , Rajinikanth , Ramoji Rao , V. Shanta , Sri Sri Ravi Shankar , and posthumously to Dhirubhai Ambani . 
 = = History = = 
 On 2 January 1954 , a press release was published from the office of the secretary to the President of India announcing the creation of two civilian awards — Bharat Ratna , the highest civilian award , and the three @-@ tier Padma Vibhushan , classified into " <unk> Warg " ( Class I ) , " <unk> Warg " ( Class II ) , and " <unk> Warg " ( Class III ) , which rank below the Bharat Ratna . On 15 January 1955 , the Padma Vibhushan was reclassified into three different awards : the Padma Vibhushan , the highest of the three , followed by the Padma Bhushan and the Padma Shri . 
 The award , along with other personal civilian honours , was briefly suspended twice in its history ; for the first time in July 1977 when Morarji Desai was sworn in as the fourth Prime Minister of India , for being " worthless and politicized " . The suspension was rescinded on 25 January 1980 after Indira Gandhi became the Prime Minister . The civilian awards were suspended again in mid @-@ 1992 , when two Public @-@ Interest Litigations were filed in the High Courts of India , one in the Kerala High Court on 13 February 1992 by Balaji Raghavan and another in the Madhya Pradesh High Court ( Indore Bench ) on 24 August 1992 by Satya Pal Anand . Both petitioners questioned the civilian awards being " titles " per an interpretation of Article 18 ( 1 ) of the Constitution of India . On 25 August 1992 , the Madhya Pradesh High Court issued a notice temporarily suspending all civilian awards . A Special Division Bench of the Supreme Court of India was formed comprising five judges : A. M. Ahmadi C. J. , Kuldip Singh , B. P. Jeevan Reddy , N. P. Singh , and S. Saghir Ahmad . On 15 December 1995 , the Special Division Bench restored the awards and delivered a judgment that the " Bharat Ratna and Padma awards are not titles under Article 18 of the Constitution of India " . 
 = = Regulations = = 
 The award is conferred for " exceptional and distinguished service " , without distinction of race , occupation , position , or sex . The criteria include " service in any field including service rendered by Government servants " , but excludes those working with the public sector undertakings , with the exception of doctors and scientists . The 1954 statutes did not allow posthumous awards , but this was subsequently modified in the January 1955 statute ; Vikram Sarabhai became the first recipient to be honoured posthumously in 1972 . 
 The recommendations are received from all state and union territory governments , the Ministries of the Government of India , the Bharat Ratna and previous Padma Vibhushan award recipients , the Institutes of Excellence , the Ministers , the Chief Ministers , the Governors of State , and the Members of Parliament , including private individuals . The recommendations received during 1 May and 15 September of every year are submitted to the Padma Awards Committee , convened by the Prime Minister of India . The Awards Committee later submits its recommendations to the Prime Minister and the President of India for further approval . 
 The Padma Vibhushan award recipients are announced every year on Republic Day of India and registered in The Gazette of India — a publication released weekly by the Department of Publication , Ministry of Urban Development used for official government notices . The conferral of the award is not considered official without its publication in the Gazette . Recipients whose awards have been revoked or restored , both of which actions require the authority of the President , are also registered in the Gazette and are required to surrender their medals when their names are struck from the register . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The original 1954 specifications of the award called for a circle made of gold gilt 1 3 ⁄ 8 inches ( 35 mm ) in diameter , with rims on both sides . A centrally located lotus flower was embossed on the obverse side of the medal and the text " Padma Vibhushan " written in Devanagari script was inscribed above the lotus along the upper edge of the medal . A floral wreath was embossed along the lower edge and a lotus wreath at the top along the upper edge . The Emblem of India was placed in the centre of the reverse side with the text " Desh Seva " in Devanagari Script on the lower edge . The medal was suspended by a pink riband 1 1 ⁄ 4 inches ( 32 mm ) in width divided into two equal segments by a white vertical line . 
 A year later , the design was modified . The current decoration is a circular @-@ shaped bronze toned medallion 1 3 ⁄ 4 inches ( 44 mm ) in diameter and 1 ⁄ 8 inch ( 3 @.@ 2 mm ) thick . The centrally placed pattern made of outer lines of a square of 1 3 ⁄ 16 inches ( 30 mm ) side is embossed with a knob carved within each of the outer angles of the pattern . A raised circular space of 1 1 ⁄ 16 inches ( 27 mm ) in diameter is placed at the centre of the decoration . A centrally located lotus flower is embossed on the obverse side of the medal and the text " Padma " written in Devanagari script is placed above and the text " Vibhushan " is placed below the lotus . The Emblem of India is placed in the centre of the reverse side with the national motto of India , " Satyameva Jayate " ( Truth alone triumphs ) , in Devanagari Script , inscribed on the lower edge . The rim , the <unk> and all embossing on either side is of white gold with the text " Padma Vibhushan " of silver gilt . The medal is suspended by a pink riband 1 1 ⁄ 4 inches ( 32 mm ) in width . 
 The medal is ranked fourth in the order of precedence of wearing of medals and decorations . The medals are produced at Alipore Mint , Kolkata along with the other civilian and military awards like Bharat Ratna , Padma Bhushan , Padma Shri , and Param Veer Chakra . 
 = = Recipients = = 
 The first recipients of the Padma Vibhushan were Satyendra Nath Bose , Nandalal Bose , Zakir Husain , Balasaheb Gangadhar Kher , V. K. Krishna Menon , and Jigme Dorji Wangchuk , who were honoured in 1954 . As of 2016 , the award has been bestowed on 294 individuals , including 6 posthumous and 19 non @-@ citizen recipients . 
 Some of the conferments have been refused or returned by the recipients ; Vilayat Khan , Swami <unk> , and <unk> Chalapathi Rau refused the award ; Lakshmi Chand Jain 's family declined the 2011 posthumous conferment , and Baba Amte returned his 1986 conferment in 1991 . 
 On 25 January 2016 , the award was conferred upon ten recipients including one non @-@ citizen recipient ; V. K. <unk> , Girija Devi , Avinash Dixit , Jagmohan , <unk> Krishnamurthy , Rajinikanth , Ramoji Rao , V. Shanta , Sri Sri Ravi Shankar , and posthumously to Dhirubhai Ambani . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Janet Jackson = 
 Janet Damita Jo Jackson ( born May 16 , 1966 ) is an American singer , songwriter , dancer and actress . Known for a series of sonically innovative , socially conscious and sexually provocative records , as well as elaborate stage shows , television and film roles , she has been a prominent figure in popular culture for over 30 years . The youngest child of the Jackson family , she began her career with the variety television series The Jacksons in 1976 and went on to appear in other television shows throughout the 1970s and early 1980s , including Good Times and Fame . 
 After signing a recording contract with A & M Records in 1982 , she became a pop icon following the release of her third studio album Control ( 1986 ) . Her collaborations with record producers Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis incorporated elements of rhythm and blues , funk , disco , rap , and industrial beats , which led to crossover success in popular music . In addition to receiving recognition for the innovation in her records , choreography , music videos , and prominence on radio airplay and MTV , she was acknowledged as a role model for her socially conscious lyrics . 
 In 1991 she signed the first of two record @-@ breaking , multimillion @-@ dollar contracts with Virgin Records , establishing her as one of the highest paid artists in the industry . Her debut album under the label , Janet ( 1993 ) , saw her develop a public image as a sex symbol as she began to explore sexuality in her work . That same year , she appeared in her first starring film role in Poetic Justice ; since then she has continued to act in feature films . By the end of the 1990s , she was named the second most successful recording artist of the decade . The release of her seventh studio album All for You ( 2001 ) coincided with a celebration of her impact on popular music as the inaugural MTV Icon . After parting ways with Virgin she released her tenth studio album Discipline ( 2008 ) , her first and only album with Island Records . In 2015 she partnered with BMG Rights Management to launch her own record label , Rhythm Nation and released her first album in seven years Unbreakable ( 2015 ) . 
 Having sold over 100 million records , she is ranked as one of the best @-@ selling artists in the history of contemporary music . The Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) lists her as the eleventh best @-@ selling female artist in the United States , with 26 million certified albums . She has amassed an extensive catalog , with singles such as " Nasty " , " Rhythm Nation " , " That 's the Way Love Goes " , " Together Again " and " All for You " among her signature songs ; she holds the record for the most consecutive top 10 hits on the US Billboard Hot 100 singles chart by a female artist with 19 . In 2016 Billboard magazine released its list of the Hot 100 All @-@ Time Top Artists , placing her at number seven , while in 2010 , ranking her fifth among the " Top 50 R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years " . Three of Jackson 's albums appeared in Billboard 's Top 200 Best @-@ Selling Albums of All @-@ Time list . One of the world 's most awarded artists , her longevity , records and achievements reflect her influence in shaping and redefining the scope of popular music . She has been cited as an inspiration among numerous performers . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1966 – 85 : Early life and career beginnings = = = 
 Janet Jackson was born in Gary , Indiana , the youngest of ten children , to Katherine Esther ( née Scruse ) and Joseph Walter Jackson . The Jacksons were lower @-@ middle class and devout Jehovah 's Witnesses , although Jackson would later refrain from organized religion . At a young age , her brothers began performing as The Jackson 5 . In March 1969 , the group signed a record deal with Motown , and soon had their first number @-@ one hit . The family then moved to the Encino neighborhood of Los Angeles . Jackson had initially desired to become a horse racing jockey or entertainment lawyer , with plans to support herself through acting . Despite this , she was anticipated to pursue a career in entertainment , and considered the idea after recording herself in the studio . At age seven , Jackson performed at the Las Vegas Strip at the MGM Casino . A biography revealed her father , Joseph Jackson , was emotionally withdrawn , and told her to address him solely by his first name as a child . She began acting in the variety show The Jacksons in 1976 . In 1977 , she was selected to have a starring role as Penny Gordon Woods in the sitcom Good Times . She later starred in A New Kind of Family and later got a recurring role on Diff 'rent Strokes , portraying Charlene Duprey from Seasons 3 to 6 . Jackson also played the role of Cleo Hewitt during the fourth season of Fame , but expressed indifference towards the series . 
 When Jackson was sixteen , her father and manager Joseph Jackson , arranged her a contract with A & M Records . Her debut album , Janet Jackson , was released in 1982 . It was produced by Angela Winbush , René Moore , Bobby Watson of Rufus ( band ) and Leon F. Sylvers III , and overseen by her father Joseph . It peaked at number sixty @-@ three on the Billboard 200 , and number six on the publication 's R & B albums chart , receiving little promotion . Jackson 's second album , Dream Street , was released two years later . Dream Street reached one @-@ hundred forty @-@ seven on the Billboard 200 , and number nineteen on the R & B albums chart . The lead single " Don 't Stand Another Chance " peaked at number nine on Billboard 's R & B singles chart . Both albums consisted primarily of bubblegum pop music . Jackson eloped with singer James DeBarge in 1984 , divorcing shortly afterwards , with the marriage annulled the following year . 
 = = = 1986 – 88 : Control = = = 
 After her second album , Jackson terminated business affairs with her family , commenting " I just wanted to get out of the house , get out from under my father , which was one of the most difficult things that I had to do . " Attempting a third album , Jackson teamed with producers Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis . They set out to achieve crossover pop appeal , while also creating a strong foundation within the urban market . Within six weeks , Jackson and the duo crafted her third studio album , Control , released in February 1986 . The album peaked at number one on the Billboard 200 , and was certified fivefold platinum by the RIAA , selling over fourteen million copies worldwide . 
 Control was declared " remarkably nervy and mature " for a teenage act , also considered " an alternative to the sentimental balladry " which permeated radio , likening Jackson to Donna Summer 's position of " unwilling to accept novelty status and taking her own steps to rise above it . " The album spawned five top five singles , " What Have You Done for Me Lately " , " Nasty " , " When I Think of You " , " Control " , and " Let 's Wait Awhile " , and a top fifteen hit with " The Pleasure Principle " . " When I Think of You " became her first number one hit on the Hot 100 . Control received six Billboard Awards , including " Top Pop Singles Artist " , and three Grammy nominations , most notably " Album of the Year " . It also won four American Music Awards from twelve nominations , an unbroken record . At this point , Jackson was successfully " shaking off the experience of being a shadow Jackson child " , becoming " an artist in her own right " . 
 The album 's lyrical content included several themes of empowerment , inspired by an incident of sexual harassment , with Jackson recalling " the danger hit home when a couple of guys started stalking me on the street ... Instead of running to Jimmy or Terry for protection , I took a stand . I backed them down . That 's how songs like ' Nasty ' and ' What Have You Done for Me Lately ' were born , out of a sense of self @-@ defense . " Its innovative fusion of dance @-@ pop and industrial music with hip @-@ hop and R & B undertones influenced the development of the new jack swing genre by bridging the gap between the latter two styles . The album 's music videos became infamous on MTV , also obtaining a then @-@ unknown Paula Abdul a recording contract for her choreography work with Jackson . Billboard stated " [ Jackson 's ] accessible sound and spectacularly choreographed videos were irresistible to MTV , and helped the channel evolve from rock programming to a broader , beat @-@ driven musical mix . " 
 = = = 1989 – 92 : Janet Jackson 's Rhythm Nation 1814 = = = 
 Jackson released her fourth album , Rhythm Nation 1814 , in September 1989 . Although her record label desired a direct sequel to Control , Jackson chose to include a socially conscious theme among various musical styles . She stated , " I know an album or a song can 't change the world . I just want my music and my dance to catch the audience 's attention , and to hold it long enough for them to listen to the lyrics . " The album 's central theme of unity was developed in response to various crimes and tragedies reported in the media . 
 Peaking at number one on the Billboard 200 , the album was certified sixfold platinum by the RIAA and sold over fourteen million copies internationally . Rolling Stone observed Jackson 's artistic growth shifted from " personal freedom to more universal concerns — injustice , illiteracy , crime , drugs — without missing a beat . " The album was also considered " the exclamation point on her career " , consisting of a " diverse collection of songs flowing with the natural talent Jackson possesses " , which effectively " expanded Janet 's range in every conceivable direction " , being " more credibly feminine , more crucially masculine , more viably adult , more believably childlike . " With singles " Miss You Much " , " Rhythm Nation " , " Escapade " , " Alright " , " Come Back to Me " , " Black Cat " and " Love Will Never Do ( Without You ) " , it became the only album in history to produce number one hits in three separate calendar years , as well as the only album to achieve seven top five singles on the Hot 100 . Famous for its choreography and warehouse setting , the " Rhythm Nation " video is considered one of the most iconic and popular in history , with Jackson 's military ensemble also making her a fashion icon . The video for Love Will Never Do ( Without You ) is notable for being the first instance of Jackson 's transition into sexual imagery and midriff @-@ baring style , becoming her trademark . Rhythm Nation 1814 became the highest selling album of 1990 , winning a record fifteen Billboard Awards . The long @-@ form " Rhythm Nation " music video won a Grammy Award . 
 Jackson 's Rhythm Nation World Tour 1990 became the most successful debut tour in history and set a record for the fastest sell @-@ out of Japan 's Tokyo Dome . She established the " Rhythm Nation Scholarship , " donating funds from the tour to various educational programs . As Jackson began her tour , she was acknowledged for the cultural impact of her music . Joel Selvin of the San Francisco Chronicle wrote " the 23 @-@ year @-@ old has been making smash hit records for four years , becoming a fixture on MTV and a major role model to teenage girls across the country " , and William Allen , then @-@ executive vice president of the United Negro College Fund , told the Los Angeles Times , " Jackson is a role model for all young people to emulate and the message she has gotten to the young people of this country through the lyrics of ' Rhythm Nation 1814 ' is having positive effects . " She also received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in recognition of her impact on the recording industry and philanthropic endeavors . The massive success experienced by Jackson placed her in league with Michael Jackson , Madonna , and Tina Turner for her achievements and influence . Ebony magazine remarked : " No individual or group has impacted the world of entertainment as have Michael and Janet Jackson , " arguing that despite many imitators , few could surpass Jackson 's " stunning style and dexterity . " With her recording contract under A & M Records fulfilled in 1991 , she signed a multimillion @-@ dollar deal with Virgin Records — estimated between thirty @-@ two to fifty million dollars — making her the highest paid recording artist at the time . The recording contract also established her reputation as the " Queen of Pop . " In 1992 , Jackson provided guest vocals on Luther Vandross 's " The Best Things in Life Are Free " , becoming a top ten Billboard hit and reaching the top ten internationally . 
 = = = 1993 – 96 : Janet , Poetic Justice , and Design of a Decade = = = 
 Jackson 's fifth studio album Janet , stylized as janet. and read " Janet , period " , was released in May 1993 . The record opened at number one on the Billboard 200 , making Jackson the first female artist in the Nielsen SoundScan era to do so . Certified sixfold platinum by the RIAA , it sold over 20 million copies worldwide . Janet spawned five singles and four promotional singles , receiving various certifications worldwide . Lead single " That 's the Way Love Goes " won the Grammy Award for Best R & B Song and topped the Billboard Hot 100 for eight consecutive weeks . " Again " reached number one for three weeks , while " If " and " Any Time , Any Place " peaked in the top four . " Because of Love " and " You Want This " charted within the top ten . 
 The album experimented with a diverse number of genres , including contemporary R & B , deep house , swing jazz , hip hop , rock , and pop , with Billboard describing each as being " delivered with consummate skill and passion . " Jackson took a larger role in songwriting and production than she did on her previous albums , explaining she found it necessary " to write all the lyrics and half of the melodies " while also speaking candidly about incorporating her sexuality into the album 's content . Rolling Stone wrote " [ a ] s princess of America 's black royal family , everything Janet Jackson does is important . Whether proclaiming herself in charge of her life , as she did on Control ( 1986 ) , or commander in chief of a rhythm army dancing to fight society 's problems ( Rhythm Nation 1814 , from 1989 ) , she 's influential . And when she announces her sexual maturity , as she does on her new album , Janet . , it 's a cultural moment . " 
 In July 1993 , Jackson made her film debut in Poetic Justice . While the film was critically panned , her performance was described as " beguiling " and " believably eccentric . " Jackson 's ballad " Again " , which was written for the film , received Golden Globe and Academy Award nominations for " Best Original Song . " In September 1993 , Jackson appeared topless on the cover of Rolling Stone , with her breasts covered by former husband René Elizondo , Jr . The photograph is the original version of the cropped image used on the Janet album cover , shot by Patrick Demarchelier . The Vancouver Sun reported , " Jackson , 27 , remains clearly established as both role model and sex symbol ; the Rolling Stone photo of Jackson ... became one of the most recognizable , and most lampooned , magazine covers . " The Janet World Tour launched in support of the studio album garnered criticism for Jackson 's lack of vocal proficiency and spontaneity , but earned critical acclaim for her showmanship . It was described as erasing the line between " stadium @-@ size pop music concerts and full @-@ scale theatrical extravaganzas . " 
 During this time , her brother Michael was immersed in a child sex abuse scandal , of which he denied any wrongdoing . She provided moral support , defending her brother , and denied abuse allegations regarding her parents made by her sister La Toya . She collaborated with Michael Jackson on " Scream " , the lead single from his album HIStory , released 1995 . The song was written by both siblings as a response to media scrutiny . It debuted at number five on the Hot 100 singles chart , becoming the first song ever to debut within the top five . " Scream " is listed in Guinness World Records as the " Most Expensive Music Video Ever Made " , costing $ 7 million . The clip won the 1995 Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video . 
 Jackson 's first compilation album , Design of a Decade : 1986 – 1996 , was released in 1995 . It peaked at number three on the Billboard 200 . The lead single , " Runaway " , became the first song by a female artist to debut within the top ten of the Hot 100 , reaching number three . Design of a Decade 1986 / 1996 was certified double platinum by the RIAA and sold ten million copies worldwide . Jackson 's influence in pop music continued to garner acclaim , as The Boston Globe remarked " If you 're talking about the female power elite in pop , you can 't get much higher than Janet Jackson , Bonnie Raitt , Madonna and Yoko Ono . Their collective influence ... is beyond measure . And who could dispute that Janet Jackson now has more credibility than brother Michael ? " Jackson renewed her contract with Virgin Records for a reported $ 80 million the following year . The contract established her as the then @-@ highest paid recording artist in history , surpassing the recording industry 's then @-@ unparalleled $ 60 million contracts earned by Michael Jackson and Madonna . 
 = = = 1997 – 99 : The Velvet Rope = = = 
 Jackson began suffering from severe depression and anxiety , leading her to chronicle the experience in her sixth album , The Velvet Rope , released October 1997 . Jackson returned with a dramatic change in image , boasting vibrant red hair , nasal piercings , and tattoos . The album is primarily centered on the idea that everyone has an intrinsic need to belong . Aside from encompassing lyrics relating to social issues such as same @-@ sex relationships , homophobia and domestic violence , it also contains themes of sadomasochism and is considered far more sexually explicit in nature than her previous release , Janet . The record was hailed as " her most daring , elaborate and accomplished album " by The New York Times , while Billboard ranked it as " the best American album of the year and the most empowering of her last five . " The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and was certified triple platinum , selling over ten million worldwide . 
 Lead single " Got ' til It 's Gone " was released in August 1997 , featuring guest vocals from folk singer Joni Mitchell and rapper Q @-@ Tip . The song 's music video , depicting a pre @-@ Apartheid celebration , won the Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video . " Together Again " became Jackson 's eighth number @-@ one hit on the Billboard Hot 100 , placing her on par with Elton John , Diana Ross , and The Rolling Stones . It spent a record forty @-@ six weeks on the Hot 100 and nineteen weeks on the United Kingdom 's singles chart . It sold six million copies worldwide , becoming one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time . " I Get Lonely " peaked at number three on the Hot 100 , and received a Grammy nomination for Best Female R & B Vocal Performance . As Jackson 's eighteenth consecutive top ten hit , it made her the only female artist to garner that achievement , surpassed only by Elvis Presley and The Beatles . Several other singles were released , including " Go Deep " and ballad " Every Time " , which was controversial for the nudity displayed in its music video . 
 The album fully established Jackson as a gay icon for its themes regarding homosexuality and protesting homophobia . " Together Again " , a " post @-@ Aids pop song " , and " Free Xone " , considered " a paean to homosexuality " and an " anti @-@ homophobia track " , were praised for their lyrical context , in addition to Jackson 's lesbian reinterpretation of Rod Stewart 's " Tonight 's the Night " . The Velvet Rope received an award for " Outstanding Music Album " at the 9th Annual GLAAD Media Awards and was honored by the National Black Lesbian and Gay Leadership Forum . A portion of the proceeds from " Together Again " were donated to the American Foundation for AIDS Research . 
 Jackson embarked on The Velvet Rope World Tour , traveling to Europe , North America , Asia , Africa , New Zealand , and Australia . The tour received praise for its theatrics , choreography , and Jackson 's vocal performance . It was likened to " the ambition and glamour of a Broadway musical " , and exclaimed as " only fitting that the concert program credits her as the show 's ' creator and director ' . " The tour 's HBO special , The Velvet Rope : Live in Madison Square Garden , garnered more than fifteen million viewers . It surpassed the ratings of all four major networks among viewers subscribed to the channel . The concert won an Emmy Award from a total of four nominations . Jackson donated a portion of the tour 's sales to America 's Promise , an organization founded by Colin Powell to assist disenfranchised youth . 
 As the tour concluded , Jackson lent guest vocals to several collaborations , including Shaggy 's " Luv Me , Luv Me " , used for the film How Stella Got Her Groove Back , as well as " Girlfriend / Boyfriend " with Teddy Riley 's group Blackstreet , and " What 's It Gonna Be ? ! " with Busta Rhymes . The latter two music videos are both among the most expensive music videos ever produced , with " What 's It Gonna Be ? ! " becoming a number @-@ one hit on the Billboard Hip @-@ Hop Singles and Hot Rap Tracks charts , reaching the top three of the Hot 100 . Jackson also contributed the ballad " God 's <unk> " to the Down in the Delta soundtrack . Jackson recorded a duet with Elton John titled " I Know the Truth , " included on the soundtrack to Elton John and Tim Rice 's Aida . At the 1999 World Music Awards , Jackson received the Legend Award for " outstanding contribution to the pop industry " . Billboard ranked Jackson as the second most successful artist of the decade , behind Mariah Carey . 
 = = = 2000 – 03 : Nutty Professor II : The Klumps and All for You = = = 
 In July 2000 , Jackson appeared in her second film , Nutty Professor II : The Klumps , as the role of Professor Denise Gaines , opposite Eddie Murphy . Director Peter Segal stated " Janet Jackson was a natural fit , and an obvious choice . " The film became her second to open at number one , grossing an estimated total of nearly $ 170 million worldwide . Jackson 's single " Doesn 't Really Matter " , used for the film 's soundtrack , became her ninth number @-@ one single on the Hot 100 . The same year , Jackson 's husband Rene Elizondo Jr. filed for divorce , revealing their private marriage to the public . Entertainment Weekly reported for eight of the thirteen years she and Elizondo had been acquainted , " [ they ] were married — a fact they managed to hide not only from the international press but from Jackson 's own father . " Elizondo filed a multimillion @-@ dollar lawsuit against her , estimated between $ 10 – 25 million , which did not reach a settlement for three years . 
 Preceding the release of her seventh album , MTV honored Jackson with the network 's inaugural " MTV Icon " ceremony , honoring her " significant contributions to music , music video and pop culture while tremendously impacting the MTV generation . " The event paid tribute to Jackson 's career and influence , including commentary from Britney Spears , Jennifer Lopez , Aaliyah , and Jessica Simpson , and performances by ' N Sync , Pink , Destiny 's Child , Usher , Buckcherry , and Outkast . The American Music Awards also honored Jackson with the Award of Merit for " her finely crafted , critically acclaimed and socially conscious , multi @-@ platinum albums . " Jackson 's seventh album , All for You , was released in April 2001 . It opened at number one on the Billboard 200 with 605 @,@ 000 copies sold , the highest first @-@ week sales of her career , and among the highest first @-@ week sales by a female artist in history . The album was a return to an upbeat dance style , receiving generally positive reception . Jackson received praise for indulging in " textures as dizzying as a new infatuation " , in contrast to other artists attempting to " match the angularity of hip @-@ hop " and following trends . All for You was certified double platinum by the RIAA and sold nine million copies worldwide . 
 The album 's lead single , " All for You " , debuted on the Hot 100 at number fourteen , setting a record for the highest debut by a single that was not commercially available . Jackson was titled " Queen of Radio " by MTV as the single made airplay history , being " added to every pop , rhythmic and urban radio station " within its first week . The song broke the overall airplay debut record with a first week audience of seventy million , debuting at number nine on the Radio Songs chart . It topped the Hot 100 for seven weeks , also reaching the top ten in eleven countries . The song received a Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording . " Someone to Call My Lover " peaked at number three on the Hot 100 . Built around a sample of the iconic 1972 hit " You 're So Vain " by Carly Simon , " Son of a Gun ( I Betcha Think This Song Is About You ) " featured Simon herself , along with Missy Elliott on remixes of the single . 
 In July 2001 , Jackson embarked on the All for You Tour , which was also broadcast on a concert special for HBO watched by twelve million viewers . The tour traveled throughout the United States and Japan , although European and Asian dates were required to be canceled following the September 11 terrorist attacks . The Los Angeles Times complimented Jackson 's showmanship . Richard Harrington of the Washington Post said Jackson 's performance surpassed her contemporaries , but Bob Massy of Spin thought her dancers " threw crisper moves " and her supporting singers were mixed nearly as high , though declared " Janet cast herself as the real entertainment . " Jackson donated a portion of the tour 's proceeds to the Boys & Girls Clubs of America . 
 The following year , Jackson began receiving media attention for her rumored relationships with Justin Timberlake , actor Matthew McConaughey , and record producer Jermaine Dupri . Upon the release of Timberlake 's debut solo album Justified , Jackson provided vocals on " ( And She Said ) Take Me Now " per Timberlake 's request , with the song initially planned as a single . Jackson collaborated with reggae artist Beenie Man for the song " Feel It Boy " , produced by The Neptunes . 
 = = = 2004 – 05 : Super Bowl XXXVIII controversy and Damita Jo = = = 
 Jackson was chosen by the National Football League and MTV to perform at the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show in February 2004 . Jackson performed a medley of " All for You " , " Rhythm Nation " , and an excerpt of " The Knowledge " before performing " Rock Your Body " alongside surprise guest Justin Timberlake . As Timberlake sang the lyric " I 'm gonna have you naked by the end of this song " , he tore open her costume , exposing her right breast to 140 million viewers . Jackson issued an apology after the performance , saying the incident was accidental and unintended , explaining that Timberlake was only meant to pull away a bustier and leave the red @-@ lace bra intact . She commented , " I am really sorry if I offended anyone . That was truly not my intention ... MTV , CBS , the NFL had no knowledge of this whatsoever , and unfortunately , the whole thing went wrong in the end . " Timberlake also issued an apology , calling the accident a " wardrobe malfunction . " The incident became the most recorded and replayed moment in TiVo history , enticing an estimated 35 @,@ 000 new subscribers . Regarded as one of the most controversial television events in history , Jackson was later listed in Guinness World Records as the " Most Searched in Internet History " and the " Most Searched for News Item " . CBS , the NFL , and MTV ( CBS 's sister network , which produced the halftime show ) , denied any knowledge of , and all responsibility for , the incident . The Federal Communications Commission heavily fined all companies involved , and continued an investigation for eight years , ultimately losing its appeal for a $ 550 @,@ 000 fine against CBS . 
 Following the incident , CBS permitted Timberlake to appear at the 46th Grammy Awards ceremony but did not allow Jackson to attend , forcing her to withdraw after being scheduled as a presenter . The controversy halted plans for Jackson to star in the biographical film of singer and activist Lena Horne , which was to be produced by American Broadcasting Company . Although Horne was reportedly displeased by the incident , Jackson 's representatives stated she withdrew from the project willingly . A Mickey Mouse statue wearing Jackson 's iconic " Rhythm Nation " outfit was mantled at Walt Disney World theme park the previous year to honor Jackson 's legacy , but was removed following Jackson 's controversial performance . 
 Jackson 's eighth studio album Damita Jo , titled after Jackson 's middle name , was released in March 2004 . It debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 . The album received mixed to positive reviews , praising the sonic innovation of selected songs and Jackson 's vocal harmonies , while others criticized its frequent themes of carnality . However , several critics ' reviews focused on the Super Bowl incident , rather than critiquing the album itself . It was certified platinum by the RIAA within a month , and sold over three million copies worldwide . 
 The album 's performance was largely affected by public backlash and the blacklisting from radio and music channels . <unk> involved in the boycott include Viacom and CBS , subsidiaries MTV , Clear Channel Communications , and Infinity Broadcasting , the latter two among the largest radio broadcasters . The blacklist was placed into effect preceding the release of Damita Jo and continued throughout the course of Jackson 's following two albums . A senior executive for entertainment conglomerate Viacom , which owns MTV , VH1 , and many radio formats , commented they were " absolutely bailing on the record . The pressure is so great , they can 't align with anything related to Janet . The high @-@ ups are still pissed at her , and this is a punitive measure . " Prior to the incident , Damita Jo was expected to outsell prior release All for You . Its three singles received positive reviews , but failed to achieve high chart positions , although each were predicted to perform extremely well under different circumstances . Billboard reported that Damita Jo " was largely overshadowed by the Super Bowl fiasco , " saying " [ t ] he three singles it spawned were blacklisted by pop radio — they were also the album 's biggest highlights — the electronic guitar studded " Just a Little While " , Motown @-@ influenced " I Want You " and the funky , heavily dance orientated " All Nite ( Don 't Stop ) " . " I Want You " was certified platinum and received a Grammy nomination . 
 For the album 's promotion , Jackson appeared as a host on Saturday Night Live , performing two songs , and was also a guest star on sitcom Will & Grace , portraying herself . Jackson received several career accolades upon the album 's release , including the " Legend Award " at the Radio Music Awards , " Inspiration Award " from the Japan Video Music Awards , " Lifetime Achievement Award " at the Soul Train Music Awards , and a Teen Choice Awards nomination for " Favorite Female . " In November 2004 , Jackson was honored as a role model by 100 Black Men of America , Inc . , presented with the organization 's Artistic Achievement Award saluting " a career that has gone from success to greater success ' . " In response to criticism for honoring Jackson in light of the Super Bowl incident , the organization responded " an individual 's worth can 't be judged by a single moment in that person 's life . " In June 2005 , she was honored with a Humanitarian Award by the Human Rights Campaign and AIDS Project Los Angeles as recognition for her involvement in raising money for AIDS charities . 
 = = = 2006 – 07 : 20 Y.O. and Why Did I Get Married ? = = = 
 Jackson began recording her ninth studio album , 20 Y.O. , in 2005 . She recorded with producers Dupri , Jam and Lewis for several months during the following year . The album 's title was a reference to the two decades since the release of her breakthrough album Control , representing the album 's " celebration of the joyful liberation and history @-@ making musical style . " To promote the album , Jackson appeared in various magazines , and performed on the Today Show and Billboard Awards . Jackson 's Us Weekly cover , revealing her slim figure after heavy media focus was placed on her fluctuations in weight , became the magazine 's best @-@ selling issue in history . 20 Y.O. was released in September 2006 and debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 . The album received mixed reviews , with multiple critics chastising the production and involvement of Jermaine Dupri . Rolling Stone disagreed with the album 's reference to Control , saying " If we were her , we wouldn 't make the comparison . " 
 Jackson 's airplay and music channel blacklist remained persistent , massively affecting her chart performance and exposure . However , lead single " Call on Me " , which featured rapper Nelly , peaked at number twenty @-@ five on the Hot 100 , number one on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , and number six in the United Kingdom . The video for the album 's second single , " So Excited " , was directed by Joseph Kahn and portrayed Jackson 's clothes disappearing through a complex dance routine . 20 Y.O. was certified platinum by the RIAA and sold 1 @.@ 2 million worldwide , also receiving a Grammy nomination for Best Contemporary R & B Album . After the album 's release , Dupri was <unk> for his production and misguidance of the album , and subsequently was removed from his position at Virgin Records . Slant Magazine stated , " After promising a return to Janet 's dance @-@ pop origins , [ Dupri ] opted to aim for urban audiences , a colossal mistake that cost Dupri his job and , probably , Janet her deal with Virgin . " 
 Jackson was ranked the seventh richest woman in the entertainment industry by Forbes , having amassed a fortune of over $ 150 million . In 2007 , she starred opposite Tyler Perry as a psychotherapist in the film Why Did I Get Married ? . It became her third consecutive film to open at number one at the box office , grossing $ 60 million in total . Jackson 's performance was praised for its " soft authority " , though also described as " charming , yet bland " . In February 2008 , Jackson won an Image Award for " Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture " for the role . Jackson was also approached to record the lead single for the film Rush Hour 3 . 
 = = = 2008 – 09 : Discipline and Number Ones = = = 
 Jackson signed with Island Records after her contract with Virgin was fulfilled . She interrupted plans for touring and began recording with various producers , including Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins , Tricky Stewart , and Stargate . Her tenth studio album , Discipline , was released in February 2008 , opening at number one . Despite radio blacklisting , the album 's first single " Feedback " peaked at number nineteen on the Hot 100 and nine on Pop Songs , her highest charting single since " Someone to Call My Lover " . Jackson was awarded the Vanguard Award at the 19th annual GLAAD Media Awards , honoring her contributions in promoting equal rights among the gay community . The organization 's president commented , " Ms. Jackson has a tremendous following inside the LGBT community and out , and having her stand with us against the defamation that LGBT people still face in our country is extremely significant . " 
 Jackson 's fifth concert tour , the Rock Witchu Tour , began in September 2008 . Jackson parted with Island Records through mutual agreement . Billboard disclosed Jackson was dissatisfied with LA Reid 's handling of the album and its promotion , saying " the label agreed to dissolve their relationship with the artist at her request . " Producer Rodney Jerkins expressed " I felt like it wasn 't pushed correctly .... She just didn 't get her just @-@ do as an artist of that magnitude . " 
 In June 2009 , Jackson 's brother Michael died at age fifty . She spoke publicly concerning his death at the 2009 BET Awards , stating " I 'd just like to say , to you , Michael is an icon , to us , Michael is family . And he will forever live in all of our hearts . On behalf of my family and myself , thank you for all of your love , thank you for all of your support . We miss him so much . " In an interview , she revealed she had first learned of his death while filming Why Did I Get Married Too ? . Amidst mourning with her family , she focused on work to deal with the grief , avoiding any news coverage of her sibling 's death . She commented , " it 's still important to face reality , and not that I 'm running , but sometimes you just need to get away for a second . " During this time , she ended her seven @-@ year relationship with Jermaine Dupri . Several months later , Jackson performed a tribute to Michael at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards , performing their duet " Scream " . MTV stated " there was no one better than Janet to anchor it and send a really powerful message . " The performance was lauded by critics , with Entertainment Weekly affirming the rendition " as energetic as it was heartfelt " . 
 Jackson 's second hits compilation , Number Ones ( retitled The Best for international releases ) , was released in November 2009 . For promotion , she performed a medley of hits at the American Music Awards , Capital FM 's Jingle Bell Ball at London 's O2 arena , and The X @-@ Factor . The album 's promotional single " Make Me " , produced with Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins , debuted in September . It became Jackson 's nineteenth number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart , making her the first artist to have number @-@ one singles in four separate decades . Later that month , Jackson chaired the inaugural benefit of amfAR , The Foundation for AIDS Research , held in Milan in conjunction with fashion week . The foundation 's CEO stated " We are profoundly grateful to Janet Jackson for joining amfAR as a chair of its first event in Milan .... She brings incomparable grace and a history of dedication to the fight against AIDS . " The event raised a total of $ 1 @.@ 1 million for the nonprofit organization . 
 = = = 2010 – 14 : Film projects , True You , concert tour , and philanthropy = = = 
 In April 2010 , Jackson reprised her role in the sequel to Why Did I Get Married ? titled Why Did I Get Married Too ? . The film opened at number two , grossing sixty million in total . Jackson 's performance was hailed as " invigorating and oddly funny " , and praised for her " willingness to be seen at her most disheveled " . Her performance earned an Image Award for " Outstanding Actress in a Motion Picture " . Jackson recorded the film 's theme , " Nothing " , released as a promotional single . The song was performed on the ninth season finale of American Idol along with " Again " and " Nasty " . In July , Jackson modeled for the Blackglama clothing line featuring mink fur . Jackson then helped design a signature line of clothing and accessories for Blackglama , to be sold at Saks Fifth Avenue and <unk> . Universal Music released the hits compilation Icon : Number Ones as the debut of the Icon compilation series . 
 In November 2010 , Jackson starred as Joanna in the drama For Colored Girls , the film adaptation of <unk> <unk> 's 1975 play For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide When the Rainbow Is <unk> . The Wall Street Journal stated Jackson " recites verses written by <unk> <unk> , the author of the play that inspired the film ... But instead of offering up a mannered coffeehouse reading of the lines , Jackson makes the words sound like ordinary — though very eloquent — speech . " Jackson 's portrayal the film was likened to Meryl Streep as Miranda Priestly in The Devil Wears Prada . Her performance earned Black Reel Awards nominations in the categories of Outstanding Supporting Actress and Outstanding Ensemble . 
 Jackson announced plans to embark on her largest world tour in support of her second hits collection , Number Ones . The tour , entitled Number Ones , Up Close and Personal , held concerts in thirty @-@ five global cities , selected by fans who submitted suggestions on her official website . During the tour , Jackson performed thirty @-@ five number one hits and dedicated a song to each city . Mattel released a limited @-@ edition Barbie of Jackson titled " Divinely Janet " , auctioned for over $ 15 @,@ 000 , with proceeds donated to Project Angel Food . Jackson released the self @-@ help book True You : A Journey to Finding and Loving Yourself in February 2011 , co @-@ written with David Ritz . It chronicled her struggle with weight and confidence , also publishing letters from fans . It topped The New York Times ' Best Seller list the following month . Additionally , she signed a film production contract with Lions Gate Entertainment to " select , develop and produce a feature film for the independent studio . " 
 Jackson became the first female pop singer to perform at the I. M. Pei glass pyramid at the Louvre Museum , raising contributions for the restoration of iconic artwork . Jackson was selected to endorse fashion line Blackglama for a second year , being the first celebrity in the line 's history chosen to do so . She partnered with the label to release a fifteen @-@ piece collection of luxury products . In 2012 , Jackson endorsed <unk> , sponsoring their weight @-@ loss program after struggling with weight fluctuations in the past . With the program , she donated ten million dollars in meals to the hungry . She was honored by amfAR for her contributions to AIDS research when chairing the Cinema Against AIDS gala during the Cannes Film Festival . She also participated in a public service announcement for UNICEF to help starving children . In February 2013 , Jackson announced she was married to her third husband , Qatari businessman <unk> Al Mana , during a private ceremony the previous year . 
 = = = 2015 – present : Rhythm Nation record label and Unbreakable = = = 
 On May 16 , 2015 , Jackson announced plans to release a new album and to embark on a world concert tour . She outlined her intention to release her new album in the fall of 2015 under her own record label , Rhythm Nation , distributed by BMG Rights Management . The launch of Rhythm Nation established Jackson as one of the few African @-@ American female musicians to own a record label . On June 15 , 2015 , Jackson announced the first set of dates for the North American leg of her Unbreakable World Tour . On June 22 , the lead single " No <unk> " was released from the album . Jackson 's solo version of the single debuted on the Hot 100 at number 67 , marking her 40th entry on the chart . The song went to number 1 on the Billboard + Twitter Trending 140 immediately following the release . The album version featuring J. Cole enabled it to re @-@ enter the Hot 100 with a new peak position at number 63 , while also topping the Adult R & B Songs chart . 
 BET presented Jackson with their inaugural Ultimate Icon : Music Dance Visual award at the BET Awards 2015 , which also featured a dance tribute to her performed by Ciara , Jason Derulo and Tinashe . It was announced she would launch a luxury jewelery line called the " Janet Jackson Unbreakable Diamonds collection , " a joint venture between herself and Paul Raps New York . On August 20 , she released a preview of a new song " The Great Forever , " while also confirming the title of her eleventh studio album as Unbreakable . Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis stated that Jackson 's concept for the album was developed simultaneously with the accompanying tour 's production and that its composition will differ from the majority of her catalog . They also stated that the album 's theme reflects " being able to be vulnerable and to be able to withstand what comes to you , " drawing on Jackson 's experiences over the past several years . The album 's title track " Unbreakable " was released on September 3 , 2015 , debuting on Apple Music 's Beats 1 radio station , hosted by Ebro Darden . The album was also made available for pre @-@ order on iTunes the same day . " <unk> ! " featuring Missy Elliott debuted on BBC Radio 1 on September 24 , 2015 . 
 Unbreakable was released on October 2 , 2015 . It received largely positive reviews , including those by The Wall Street Journal , The New York Times , USA Today , Los Angeles Times , and The Guardian . The following week , Jackson received a nomination to be inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . Her album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , becoming her seventh album to top the chart in the United States . On April 6 , 2016 , Jackson announced that she was " planning her family " with husband <unk> Al Mana , resulting in her postponing her tour . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Music and voice = = = 
 Jackson has a mezzo @-@ soprano vocal range . Over the course of her career , she has received frequent criticism for the limits of her vocal capabilities , especially in comparison to contemporary artists such as Whitney Houston and Mariah Carey . In comparing her vocal technique to Houston and Aretha Franklin , vocal coach Roger Love states that " [ w ] hen Janet sings , she allows a tremendous amount of air to come through . She 's obviously aiming for a sexy , sultry effect , and on one level that works nicely . But actually , it 's fairly limited . " He adds that while her voice is suitable for studio recording , it doesn 't translate well to stage because despite having " great songs , incredible dancing , and her star like presence , the live show is still magnificent . But the voice is not the star . " Biographer David Ritz commented , " on Janet 's albums — and in her videos and live performances , which revealed a crisp , athletic dance technique [ ... ] singing wasn 't the point , " saying emphasis was placed on " her slamming beats , infectious hooks , and impeccable production values . " Eric Henderson of Slant magazine claimed critics opposing her small voice " somehow missed the explosive ' gimme a beat ' vocal pyrotechnics she unleashes all over ' Nasty ' ... Or that they completely dismissed how perfect her tremulous hesitance fits into the abstinence anthem ' Let 's Wait Awhile ' . " Classical composer Louis Andriessen has praised Jackson for her " rubato , sense of rhythm , sensitivity , and the childlike quality of her strangely erotic voice . " Several critics also consider her voice to often be enveloped within her music 's production . Music critic J. D. Considine noted " on albums , Jackson 's sound isn 't defined by her voice so much as by the way her voice is framed by the lush , propulsive production of Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis . " Wendy Robinson of PopMatters said " the power of Janet Jackson 's voice does not lie in her pipes . She doesn 't blow , she whispers ... Jackson 's <unk> vocals are masterfully complemented by gentle harmonies and balanced out by pulsing rhythms , so she 's never unpleasant to listen to . " Matthew <unk> of <unk> suggested Jackson 's vocal techniques as a study for indie rock music , considering it to possess " a somewhat subliminal effect on the listener , guiding and emphasizing dynamic shifts without distracting attention from its primal hooks . " <unk> added : " Her voice effortlessly transitions from a rhythmic toughness to soulful emoting to a flirty softness without overselling any aspect of her performance ... a continuum of emotions and attitudes that add up to the impression that we 're listening to the expression of a fully @-@ formed human being with contradictions and complexities . " 
 Jackson 's music has encompassed a broad range of genres . Her records from the 1980s have been described as being influenced by Prince , as her producers are ex @-@ members of The Time . Sal Cinquemani wrote that in addition to defining Top 40 radio , she " gave Prince 's Minneapolis sound a distinctly feminine — and , with songs like ' What Have You Done for Me Lately ? , ' ' Nasty , ' ' Control , ' and ' Let 's Wait Awhile , ' a distinctly feminist — spin . " On Control , Richard J. Ripani documented that she , Jam and Lewis had " crafted a new sound that fuses the rhythmic elements of funk and disco , along with heavy doses of synthesizers , percussion , sound effects , and a rap music sensibility . " Author Rickey Vincent stated that she has often been credited for redefining the standard of popular music with the industrial @-@ strength beats of the album . She is considered a trendsetter in pop balladry , with Richard <unk> stating " the black pop ballad of the mid @-@ 1980s had been dominated by the vocal and production style that was smooth and polished , led by singers Whitney Houston , Janet Jackson , and James Ingram . " Jackson continued her musical development by blending pop and urban music with elements of hip @-@ hop in the nineties . This included a softer representation , articulated by lush , soulful ballads and up @-@ tempo dance beats . She has been described as " an artist who has reshaped the sound and image of rhythm and blues " within the first decade of her career . Critic Karla Peterson remarked that " she is a sharp dancer , an appealing performer , and as ' That 's the Way Love Goes ' proves — an ace pop @-@ song writer . " Selected material from the following decade has been viewed less favorably , as Sal Cinquemani comments " except for maybe R.E.M. , no other former superstar act has been as prolific with such diminishing commercial and creative returns . " 
 Jackson has changed her lyrical focus over the years , becoming the subject of analysis in musicology , African American studies , and gender studies . David Ritz compared Jackson 's musical style to Marvin Gaye 's , stating , " like Marvin , autobiography seemed the sole source of her music . Her art , also like Marvin 's , floated over a reservoir of secret pain . " Much of her success has been attributed to " a series of powerful , metallic grooves ; her chirpy , multi @-@ tracked vocals ; and a lyrical philosophy built on pride and self @-@ knowledge . " Ritz also stated , " The mystery is the low flame that burns around the perimeters of Janet Jackson 's soul . The flame feeds off the most highly combustible elements : survival and ambition , caution and creativity , supreme confidence and dark fear . " During the 1980s , her lyrics embodied self @-@ actualization , feminist principles , and politically driven ideology . Gillian G. Gaar , author of She 's a Rebel : The History of Women in Rock & Roll ( 2002 ) , described Control as " an autobiographical tale about her life with her parents , her first marriage , and breaking free . " Encyclopedia of African American Popular Culture ( 2010 ) author Jessie Carney Smith wrote " with that album , she asserted her independence , individuality , and personal power . She challenged audiences to see her as a transformed person , from an ingénue to a grow @-@ up , multi @-@ talented celebrity . " Referring to Rhythm Nation 1814 as an embodiment of hope , Timothy E. Scheurer , author of Born in the USA : The Myth of America in Popular Music from Colonial Times to the Present ( 2007 ) wrote " It may remind some of Sly Stone prior to There 's a Riot Going On and other African @-@ American artists of the 1970s in its tacit assumption that the world imagined by Dr. King is still possible , that the American Dream is a dream for all people . " 
 On Janet , Jackson began focusing on sexual themes . Shayne Lee , author of Erotic Revolutionaries : Black Women , Sexuality , and Popular Culture ( 2010 ) , wrote that her music over the following decade " brand [ ed ] her as one of the most sexually stimulating vocalists of the 1990s . " In You 've Come A Long Way , Baby : Women , Politics , and Popular Culture ( 1996 ) , Lilly J. Goren observed " Jackson 's evolution from politically aware musician to sexy diva marked the direction that society and the music industry were encouraging the dance @-@ rock divas to pursue . " The Washington Post declared Jackson 's public image over the course of her career had shifted " from innocence to experience , inspiring such carnal albums as 1993 's ' Janet ' and 1997 's ' The Velvet Rope ' , the latter of which explored the bonds — figuratively and literally — of love and lust . " The song " Free Xone " from The Velvet Rope , which portrays same @-@ sex relationships in a positive light , is described by sociologist Shayne Lee as " a rare incident in which a popular black vocalist explores romantic or sensual energy outside the contours of heteronormativity , making it a significant song in black sexual politics . " During promotion for Janet , she stated " I love feeling deeply sexual — and don 't mind letting the world know . For me , sex has become a celebration , a joyful part of the creative process . " Upon the release of Damita Jo , <unk> stated " Beginning with the earlier albums , exploring — and liberating — my sexuality has been an ongoing discovery and theme , " adding " As an artist , that 's not only my passion , it 's my obligation . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine has found Jackson 's consistent inclusion of sex in her music lacking ingenuity , especially in comparisons to other artists such as Prince , stating " while sex indisputably fuels much great pop music , it isn 't an inherently fascinating topic for pop music — as with anything , it all depends on the artist . " 
 = = = Videos and stage = = = 
 Jackson drew inspiration for her music videos and performances from musicals she watched in her youth , and was heavily influenced by the choreography of Fred Astaire and Michael Kidd , among others . Throughout her career , she has worked with and brought numerous professional choreographers to prominence , such as Tina Landon , Paula Abdul , and Michael Kidd . Veronica Chambers declared , " Her impact on pop music is undeniable and far @-@ reaching , " adding , " A quick glance at the Billboard chart reveals any number of artists cast in the Janet Jackson mold . " Chambers observed numerous videos which " features not only Ms. Jackson 's dancers but choreography and sets remarkably like those she has used . " Janine Coveney of Billboard observed that " Jackson 's musical declaration of independence [ Control ] launched a string of hits , an indelible production sound , and an enduring image cemented by groundbreaking video choreography and imagery that pop vocalists still emulate . " Ben Hogwood of MusicOMH applauded the " huge influence she has become on younger pretenders to her throne , " most notably Britney Spears , Jennifer Lopez and Christina Aguilera . <unk> EI @-@ Amin remarked that many pop artists " pattern their performances after Janet 's proven dance @-@ diva persona . " Beretta E. Smith @-@ <unk> , author of Shaded Lives : African @-@ American Women and Television ( 2002 ) , wrote that " Jackson 's impact on the music video sphere came largely through music sales successes , which afforded her more visual liberties and control . This assuming of control directly impacted the look and content of her music videos , giving Jackson an agency not assumed by many other artists — male or female , Black or White . " Parallel Lines : Media Representations of Dance ( 1993 ) documents that her videos have often been reminiscent of live concerts or elaborate musical theater . However , in her 30 @-@ minute Rhythm Nation 1814 film , Jackson utilizes street dancing techniques in contrast to traditional choreography . The group dynamic visually embodies a gender neutral equality , with Jackson " performing asexually and anonymously in front of , but as one of the members of the group . " Her music videos have also contributed to a higher degree of sexual freedom among young women , as Jean M. Twenge , author of Generation Me : Why Today 's Young Americans are More Confident , Assertive , Entitled — and More Miserable Than Ever Before ( 2007 ) , wrote " [ m ] <unk> videos by female artists have contributed to the trend " of young women <unk> in oral sex with Jackson " heavily implying male @-@ on @-@ female oral sex in music videos by pushing down on a man 's head until he 's in exactly the right position . " However , accusations of cosmetic surgery , skin lightening , and increasingly hypersexual imagery have led to her being viewed as conforming to a white , male @-@ dominated view of sexuality , rather than liberating herself or others . <unk> received the MTV Video Vanguard Award for her contributions to the art form , and became the first recipient of the MTV Icon tribute , celebrating her impact on the music industry as a whole . In 2003 , Slant Magazine named " Rhythm Nation " and " Got ' til It 's Gone " among the 100 Greatest Music Videos of all time , ranked at number 87 and number 10 , respectively . In 2011 , " Rhythm Nation " was voted the tenth best music video of the 1980s by Billboard . 
 The Independent writer Nicholas Barber stated " Janet 's concerts are the pop equivalent of a summer blockbuster movie , with all the explosions , special effects , ersatz sentimentality , gratuitous cleavage and emphasis on spectacle over coherence that the term implies . " Jet magazine reported " Janet 's innovative stage performances during her world tours have won her a reputation as a world @-@ class performer . " Chris Willman of Los Angeles Times stated the " enthralling " choreography of Jackson 's Rhythm Nation 1814 Tour " represents the pinnacle of what can be done in the popping ' n ' locking style — a rapid @-@ fire mixture of rigidly jerky and gracefully fluid movements . " When Jackson was asked " do you understand it when people talk about [ The Velvet Rope Tour ] in terms of Broadway ? " , she responded , " I 'm crazy about Broadway ... That 's what I grew up on . " Her " Number Ones : Up Close and Personal " tour deviated from the full @-@ scale theatrics found in her previous concert arena settings in favor of smaller venues . Critics noted being scaled down did not affect the impact of her showmanship , and in some cases , enhanced it . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune wrote , " In past tours , Jackson 's thin voice was often swallowed up by the sheer size of her production ... In the more scaled @-@ down setting , Jackson brought a warmth and a passion that wasn 't always evident in stadiums ... the best Janet Jackson performance I 've covered in 20 @-@ plus years . " 
 Thor Christensen of The Dallas Morning News reported Jackson often lip syncs in concert ; he wrote : " Janet Jackson — one of pop 's most notorious onstage lip @-@ <unk> — conceded ... she uses ' some ' taped vocals to augment her live vocals . But she refused to say what percentage of her concert ' voice ' is taped and how much is live . " Michael MacCambridge of the Austin American @-@ Statesman , who reviewed Jackson 's Rhythm Nation World Tour , described lip @-@ syncing as a " moot point " , stating " Jackson was frequently singing along with her own pre @-@ recorded vocals , to achieve a sound closer to radio versions of singles . " MacCambridge also observed " it seemed unlikely that anyone — even a prized member of the First Family of Soul Music — could dance like she did for 90 minutes and still provide the sort of powerful vocals that the ' 90s super concerts are expected to achieve . " Similarly , Chris Willman commented , " even a classically trained vocalist would be hard @-@ pressed to maintain any sort of level of volume — or , more appropriately , ' Control ' — while bounding up and down stairs and whipping limbs in unnatural directions at impeccable , breakneck speed . " Critics observed that in the smaller scale of her " Number Ones : Up Close and Personal " tour , she forewent lip @-@ syncing . Chris Richards of The Washington Post stated " even at its <unk> , that delicate voice hasn 't lost the <unk> precision . " 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Jackson describes Lena Horne as a profound inspiration , for entertainers of several generations as well as herself . Upon Horne 's death , she stated " [ Horne ] brought much joy into everyone 's lives — even the younger generations , younger than myself . She was such a great talent . She opened up such doors for artists like myself . " Similarly , she considers Dorothy Dandridge to be one of her idols . Jackson has declared herself " a very big Joni Mitchell fan " , explaining " As a kid I was drawn to Joni Mitchell records [ ... ] Joni 's songs spoke to me in an intimate , personal way . " She holds reference for Tina Turner , stating " Tina has become a heroic figure for many people , especially women , because of her tremendous strength . Personally , Tina doesn 't seem to have a beginning or an end in my life . I felt her music was always there , and I feel like it always will be . " She has also named other socially conscious acts , such as Tracy Chapman , Sly and the Family Stone , U2 , and Bob Dylan as sources of inspiration . In her early career , Jackson credited her brothers Michael and Jermaine as musical influences . According to Rolling Stone and MTV , other artists attributed as influences are The Ronettes , Dionne Warwick , Tammi Terrell , Diana Ross , Chaka Khan , Stevie Wonder , Teena Marie , Michael Jackson , Prince , and Tina Turner 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The youngest sister of the " precious Jackson clan " , Janet Jackson has striven to distance her professional career from that of her older brother Michael and the rest of the Jackson family . Steve Dollar of Newsday wrote that " [ s ] he projects that home girl @-@ next @-@ door quality that belies her place as the youngest sibling in a family whose inner and outer lives have been as poked at , gossiped about , <unk> and hard @-@ copied as the Kennedys . " Phillip McCarthy of The Sydney Morning Herald noted that throughout her recording career , one of her common conditions for interviewers has been that there would be no mention of Michael . Joshua Klein wrote , " [ f ] or the first half of her recording career , Janet Jackson sounded like an artist with something to prove . Emerging in 1982 just as big brother Michael was casting his longest shadow , Jackson filled her albums not so much with songs as with declarations , from ' The Pleasure Principle ' to the radical @-@ sounding ' Rhythm Nation ' to the telling statement of purpose , ' Control ' . " Steve Huey of Allmusic asserted that despite being born into a family of entertainers , Janet Jackson has managed to emerge a " superstar " in her own right , rivaling not only several female recording artists including Madonna and Whitney Houston , but also her brother , while " successfully [ shifting ] her image from a strong , independent young woman to a sexy , mature adult . " By forging her own unique identity through her artistry and her business ventures , she has been esteemed as the " Queen of Pop " . Klein argued that " stardom was not too hard to predict , but few could have foreseen that Janet — Miss Jackson , if you 're nasty — would one day replace Michael as true heir to the Jackson family legacy . " . 
 Jackson has also been recognized for playing a pivotal role in crossing racial boundaries in the recording industry , where black artists were once considered to be substandard . In Right to Rock : The Black Rock Coalition and the Cultural Politics of Race ( 2004 ) , author Maureen Mahon states : " In the 1980s , Whitney Houston , Michael Jackson , Janet Jackson , and Prince were among the African American artists who crossed over ... When black artists cross over into pop success they cease to be black in the industry sense of the word . They get promoted from racialized black music to universal pop music in an economically driven process of racial transcendence . " Routledge International Encyclopedia of Women : Global Women 's Issues and Knowledge ( 2000 ) documented that Jackson , along with other prominent African @-@ American women , had achieved financial breakthroughs in mainstream popular music , receiving " superstar status " in the process . She , alongside her contemporaries " offered viable creative , intellectual , and business paths for establishing and maintaining agency , lyrical potency , marketing and ownership . " Her business savvy has been compared to that of Madonna , gaining a level of autonomy which enables " creative latitude and access to financial resources and mass @-@ market distribution . " A model of reinvention , author Jessie Carney Smith wrote that " Janet has continued to test the limits of her transformative power " , receiving accolades in music , film and concert tours throughout the course of her career . 
 Musicologist Richard J. Ripani identified Jackson as a leader in the development of contemporary R & B , as her music created a unique blend of genre and sound effects which ushered in the use of rap vocals into mainstream R & B. He also argues her signature song " Nasty " influenced the new jack swing genre developed by Teddy Riley . Leon McDermott of the Sunday Herald wrote : " Her million @-@ selling albums in the 1980s helped invent contemporary R & B through Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis 's muscular , lean production ; the sinuous grooves threaded through 1986 's Control and 1989 's Rhythm Nation 1814 are the foundation upon which today 's hot shot producers and singers rely . " In Bring the Noise : 20 Years of Writing About Hip Rock and Hip Hop ( 2011 ) , Simon Reynolds described Jackson 's collaborations with her record producers as a reinvention of the dance @-@ pop genre , introducing a new sonic palate . Den Berry , Virgin Records CEO and Chairman stated : " Janet is the very embodiment of a global superstar . Her artistic brilliance and personal appeal transcend geographic , cultural and generational boundaries . " In July 1999 , she placed at number 77 on VH1 's " 100 Greatest Women of Rock and Roll " . She also placed at number 134 on their list of the " 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons of All Time " , number seven on the " 100 Greatest Women In Music " , and at number two on the " 50 Greatest Women of the Video Era " , behind Madonna . In March 2008 , Business Wire reported " Janet Jackson is one of the top ten selling artists in the history of contemporary music ; ranked by Billboard magazine as the ninth most successful act in rock and roll history , and the second most successful female artist in pop music history . " She is the only female artist in the history of the Hot 100 to have 18 consecutive top ten hit singles , from " Miss You Much " ( 1989 ) to " I Get Lonely " ( 1998 ) . The magazine ranked her at number seven on their Hot 100 50th Anniversary " All @-@ Time Top Artists " , making her the third most successful female artist in the history of the chart , following Madonna and Mariah Carey . In November 2010 , Billboard released its " Top 50 R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years " list and ranked her at number five . She ranks as the top artist on the chart with 15 number ones in the past twenty @-@ five years , garnering 27 top ten hits between 1985 and 2001 , and 33 consecutive top 40 hits from 1985 through 2004 . The most awarded artist in the history of the Billboard Music Awards with 33 wins , she is one an elite group of musical acts , such as Madonna , Aerosmith , Garth Brooks and Eric Clapton , whom Billboard credits for " redefining the landscape of popular music . " In November 2014 , Jackson was voted ' Queen of Pop ' by a poll conducted online by <unk> In October , 2015 , she received a nomination to be inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . 
 Jackson 's music and choreography have inspired numerous performers . Virgin Records executive Lee <unk> expressed : " Janet is an icon and historic figure in our culture . She 's one of those gifted artists that people look up to , that people emulate , that people want to believe in ... there 's not that many superstars that stand the test of time . " Sarah Rodman of the Boston Herald remarked : " For every hand @-@ fluttering , overwrought , melisma addict out there aping Mariah 's dog calls , there 's an equal number trying to match Jackson 's bubbling grooves and fancy footwork , including Britney , Aaliyah and Destiny 's Child . " Music critic Gene Stout commented she " has so broadly influenced a younger generation of performers , from Jennifer Lopez ... to Britney Spears , who has copied so many of Jackson 's dance moves . " ' N Sync and Usher have credited her for teaching them how to develop stage show into theatrical performance . Beyoncé Knowles , Toni Braxton , Aaliyah , Britney Spears , Christina Aguilera , Crystal Kay , Kelly Rowland , Rihanna , and Brazilian singer Kelly Key have all named her as one of their biggest inspirations , while others such as <unk> " Chilli " Thomas of TLC , Cassie , Nicki Minaj , Keri Hilson , and DJ / singer Havana Brown , have all expressed desire to emulate her . Elysa Gardner of USA Today wrote : " Jackson claims not to be bothered by the brigade of barely post @-@ adolescent baby divas who have been inspired by — and , in some cases , have flagrantly <unk> — the sharp , animated choreography and girlish but decidedly post @-@ feminist feistiness that have long been hallmarks of her performance style . " Those who are considered to have followed in her footsteps have been referred to as " Janet @-@ come @-@ lately 's . " Other artists who have drawn comparison to her include Mýa , Brandy , Tatyana Ali , Christina Milian , Lady Gaga , Namie Amuro , and BoA . Sociologist Shayne Lee commented that " [ a ] s Janet enters the twilight of her reign as erotic Queen of Pop , Beyoncé Knowles emerges as her likely successor . " Joan Morgan of Essence magazine remarked : " Jackson 's Control , Rhythm Nation 1814 and janet. established the singer @-@ dancer imprimatur standard in pop culture we now take for granted . So when you 're thinking of asking Miss Jackson , ' What have you done for me lately ? ' remember that Britney , Ciara and Beyoncé live in the house that Janet built . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 Janet Jackson ( 1982 ) 
 Dream Street ( 1984 ) 
 Control ( 1986 ) 
 Janet Jackson 's Rhythm Nation 1814 ( 1989 ) 
 janet . ( 1993 ) 
 The Velvet Rope ( 1997 ) 
 All for You ( 2001 ) 
 Damita Jo ( 2004 ) 
 20 Y.O. ( 2006 ) 
 Discipline ( 2008 ) 
 Unbreakable ( 2015 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Good Times ( 1977 – 79 ) 
 Diff 'rent Strokes ( 1980 – 84 ) 
 Fame ( 1984 – 85 ) 
 Poetic Justice ( 1993 ) 
 Nutty Professor II : The Klumps ( 2000 ) 
 Why Did I Get Married ? ( 2007 ) 
 Why Did I Get Married Too ? ( 2010 ) 
 For Colored Girls ( 2010 ) 
 = = Tours = = 
 Rhythm Nation World Tour ( 1990 ) 
 Janet World Tour ( 1993 – 95 ) 
 The Velvet Rope Tour ( 1998 – 99 ) 
 All for You Tour ( 2001 – 02 ) 
 Rock Witchu Tour ( 2008 ) 
 Number Ones , Up Close and Personal World Tour ( 2011 ) 
 Unbreakable World Tour ( 2015 – 16 ) 
 = = Books = = 
 True You ( 2011 ) 
 = German destroyer Z8 Bruno Heinemann = 
 Z8 Bruno Heinemann was a Type 1934A @-@ class destroyer built for Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine in the mid @-@ 1930s . After the start of World War II in September 1939 , she blockaded the Polish coast and searched neutral shipping for contraband . In late 1939 and early 1940 the ship made three successful minelaying sorties off the English coast that claimed 17 merchant ships . Bruno Heinemann participated in the early stages of the Norwegian Campaign by transporting troops to the Trondheim area in early April 1940 . The ship was transferred to France a year later to escort German ships that used the French ports on the Atlantic coast . She was returning to France in early 1942 when she struck two mines and sank off the coast of Belgium . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Bruno Heinemann had an overall length of 119 meters ( 390 ft 5 in ) and was 114 meters ( 374 ft 0 in ) long at the waterline . The ship had a beam of 11 @.@ 30 meters ( 37 ft 1 in ) , and a maximum draft of 4 @.@ 23 meters ( 13 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 171 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 137 long tons ) at standard and 3 @,@ 110 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 060 long tons ) at deep load . The Wagner geared steam turbines were designed to produce 70 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 51 @,@ 485 kW ; 69 @,@ 042 shp ) which would propel the ship at 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam was provided to the turbines by six high @-@ pressure Wagner boilers with superheaters . Bruno Heinemann carried a maximum of 752 metric tons ( 740 long tons ) of fuel oil which was intended to give a range of 4 @,@ 400 nmi ( 8 @,@ 100 km ; 5 @,@ 100 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , but the ship proved top @-@ heavy in service and 30 % of the fuel had to be retained as ballast low in the ship . The effective range proved to be only 1 @,@ 530 nmi ( 2 @,@ 830 km ; 1 @,@ 760 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . 
 Bruno Heinemann carried five 12 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 34 guns in single mounts with gun shields , two each superimposed , fore and aft . The fifth gun was carried on top of the rear deckhouse . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of four 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns in two twin mounts abreast the rear funnel and six 2 cm C / 30 guns in single mounts . The ship carried eight above @-@ water 53 @.@ 3 @-@ centimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes in two power @-@ operated mounts . A pair of reload torpedoes were provided for each mount . Four depth charge throwers were mounted on the sides of the rear deckhouse and they were supplemented by six racks for individual depth charges on the sides of the stern . Enough depth charges were carried for either two or four patterns of 16 charges each . Mine rails could be fitted on the rear deck that had a maximum capacity of 60 mines . A system of passive hydrophones designated as ' GHG ' ( German : Gruppenhorchgerät ) was fitted to detect submarines . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The ship was ordered on 9 January 1935 and laid down at DeSchiMAG , Bremen on 14 January 1936 as yard number <unk> . She was launched on 15 September 1936 and completed on 8 January 1937 . Bruno Heinemann and her sister Z5 Paul Jakobi sailed to Norway in April 1938 to test the new 15 @-@ centimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) <unk> C / 36 gun planned for later classes of destroyers . Bruno Heinemann had been fitted with four of the new weapons and they were removed after gunnery trials off Ålesund were completed . The ship participated in the August 1938 Fleet Review as part of the 6th Destroyer Division and the following fleet exercise . Early in 1939 , she spent several months in the Baltic Sea to evaluate whether reduced steam pressure would solve some of the problems of her high @-@ pressure steam plant . 
 When World War II began , Bruno Heinemann was initially deployed in the Baltic to operate against the Polish Navy and to enforce a blockade of Poland , but she was soon transferred to the German Bight where she joined her sisters in laying defensive minefields . She also patrolled the Skagerrak to inspect neutral shipping for contraband goods and was also briefly refitted during this time . After completing her refit , Bruno Heinemann and Paul Jakobi were bound for the Baltic via the Kiel Canal when they were attacked by 11 Handley Page Hampden bombers of No. 144 Squadron RAF on 29 September . The British aircraft failed to damage the German ships and five were shot down by Messerschmitt Bf 109E fighters . 
 Although the other destroyers were busy escorting the German heavy ships and laying minefields off the British coast in October and November , Bruno Heinemann played no part of any of these operations until the night of 12 / 13 December . Under the command of Commodore Friedrich Bonte in his flagship Hermann Künne , Bruno Heinemann , Richard Beitzen , Friedrich Ihn , and Erich Steinbrinck laid 240 mines off the mouth of the River Tyne , where the navigation lights were still lit . The British were unaware of the minefield 's existence and lost eleven ships totaling 18 @,@ 979 Gross Register Tons ( GRT ) . While withdrawing at high speed Bruno Heinemann suffered a serious fire in one of her turbine rooms and was ordered to heave @-@ to while the fire was put out . The destroyers were later ordered to escort the crippled light cruisers Leipzig and Nürnberg which had been torpedoed by the submarine HMS Salmon while covering the destroyers ' withdrawal . Despite their escort , the submarine HMS Ursula managed to sneak inside the anti @-@ submarine screen and fired a salvo of six torpedoes at Leipzig in the Elbe estuary . Two of the torpedoes struck the destroyer escort F9 which sank three minutes later with heavy loss of life , but the other torpedoes missed . On the night of 10 / 11 January 1940 the ship laid a minefield off Cromer with her sisters Wolfgang Zenker and Erich Koellner . Three ships totaling 11 @,@ 155 GRT were sunk by this minefield . The same three ships made another sortie on the night of 9 / 10 February into the same area and laid 157 mines that claimed three more ships totaling 11 @,@ 855 GRT . 
 Bruno Heinemann was allocated to Group 2 for the Norwegian portion of Operation Weserübung . The group 's task was to transport the 138th Mountain Infantry Regiment ( 138 . Gebirgsjäger Regiment ) to seize Trondheim together with the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper . The ships began loading troops on 6 April and set sail the next day . Bruno Heinemann and her sisters Paul Jakobi and Theodor Riedel each carried a company of mountain troops tasked to seize the forts defending the entrance to the Trondheimsfjord . After passing the surprised forts the ships were able to land their troops and capture the forts with little difficulty . All of the destroyers had suffered storm damage en route and were low on fuel because none of the oil tankers had arrived yet . Admiral Hipper was ordered home on 10 April . Fuel was transferred from Bruno Heinemann and Paul Jakobi to Friedrich Eckoldt sufficient to give the heavy cruiser some anti @-@ submarine protection . However , even this proved to be insufficient fuel , so the Friedrich Eckoldt was ordered to return later that night . Two days later enough fuel had been found in Trondheim to allow Friedrich Eckoldt and Bruno Heinemann to sail on 14 April ; they reached Germany the next day without incident . Sometime in 1939 – 41 the ship was fitted with a FuMO 21 or FuMO 24 radar set above the bridge . 
 The ship escorted a force of minelayers on the nights of 29 / 30 April and 9 / 10 May 1940 in the vicinity of the Great Fisherman 's Bank , but the second sortie turned back when British destroyers were spotted . Bruno Heinemann began a lengthy refit later that month and she was still not combat worthy in November . On 5 April 1941 , Bruno Heinemann left Germany for Occupied France and she was attacked by two torpedo bombers en route , but suffered no damage . The ship and the other destroyers present escorted commerce raiders , blockade runners and major warships as they used the French Atlantic coast ports until she was recalled on 6 September for another refit . Bruno Heinemann probably was fitted at this time with a four @-@ barrel 2 @-@ centimeter AA gun on her aft deckhouse that replaced the pair of 2 @-@ centimeter guns originally mounted there . She escorted the battleship Tirpitz in mid @-@ January 1942 as she sailed from the Baltic to Trondheim . Bruno Heinemann , together with the rest of the 5th Destroyer Flotilla , sailed from Kiel on 24 January for France as part of the preparations for the Channel Dash . On the evening of 25 January , she struck two mines laid by HMS Plover off the Belgian coast . The first detonated beneath the ship and knocked out Nos. 2 and 3 boiler rooms and the second blew the ship 's bow off shortly afterwards . 98 members of the ship 's crew lost their lives : 93 were lost at sea , while another five , who had originally been among the 234 men rescued , died of their wounds . 
 = Kreia = 
 Kreia is a fictional character and party member in Obsidian Entertainment 's Star Wars Knights of the Old Republic II : The Sith Lords . She is a blind Force @-@ sensitive who forms a " bond " with the player character , the Jedi Exile , through the Force . Kreia sets herself up as the Exile 's mentor , and rejects the divide of the light and dark side of the Force , as well as the predestination the Force entails . By the game 's end , it is revealed she is the Sith Lord Darth Traya and is planning on destroying the Force , and she becomes the final boss of The Sith Lords . Kreia makes no more appearances in Star Wars fiction , though a miniature by Wizards of the Coast was released in August 2008 . 
 Written by Chris Avellone , the character was created as a sounding board for the game 's theme of the role of the Jedi and the nature of the Force , and was heavily influenced by Planescape : Torment 's Ravel Puzzlewell . She served both to test the player and to act as a mouthpiece for any questions Avellone thought should be asked about the Star Wars universe . Sara Kestelman voiced the character , with Kreia 's casting being considered the most important of all the characters . Her name references Princess Leia of the original Star Wars trilogy , while her character design draws both on Palpatine 's hood and Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi 's robes . 
 She was positively received , and is often pointed as the highlight of The Sith Lords . Praise went to the questions and dialogue she provided , as well as her voice acting . The character has appeared in numerous " top lists " , often commending her as a Star Wars character . Attention was drawn to one moment where Kreia lectures about the dangers of charity . Despite this , Avellone felt he failed in creating a " sympathetic " Sith Lord , though has called her one of his favorite characters in the game . 
 = = Conception and creation = = 
 The first draft of the game placed a figurehead similar to Kreia as the leader of a matriarchs ruling the Handmaiden 's world , which the player was sent to free . This draft was made before Obsidian had played the first game , due to LucasArts needing Obsidian to sign a contract before giving them copies of Knights of the Old Republic , and after they had played it the draft was discarded . However , some of Kreia 's characteristics were salvaged , though little else was . 
 In the game proper , Kreia was written by Chris Avellone , who was also lead designer of The Sith Lords and created most of the party . Avellone was initially unsure about working on Star Wars but after beginning became more invested in and " excited " about it . Avellone decided to attempt to create a sympathetic Sith Lord . The character was highly influenced by Ravel Puzzlewell , a Planescape : Torment character which Avellone also wrote , and was intended to tell stories with her he had been unable to do in Torment . Avellone felt it would be " cool " to be in a party with Ravel . Despite Ravel 's influence , the Star Wars setting and its elements resulted in Kreia changing heavily . 
 A multi @-@ page biography was created for narrative reference , art and audio . When making characters , Avellone prefers to focus on : their role in the story , their name , their visual signature ( discussed with the concept artist ) , and in Kreia 's case the character 's ability to serve as his voice . Her name is inspired by Princess Leia of the original Star Wars films , and serves a similar role as ally , but Kreia has darker past demonstrated a harsher prefix . Her visuals , meanwhile , combine elements of both " the wise mentor " like Obi @-@ Wan 's robes and dark side elements like Palpatine 's hood . Brian Menze , lead concept artist and modeller for the characters , designed Kreia . 
 Narratively , Kreia had several roles in The Sith Lords , acting as a party member , a foil , and a " sounding board " for the theme of the game , which concerned the Jedi 's role and the Force 's nature in a living galaxy . As an extension of Avellone 's voice , Kreia became his way of expressing all his problems with the Force . Despite her view of the Force , it was important to avoid causing continuity problems with the rest of the Star Wars series , and her views were presented within the context of the original Force in the Star Wars world . Kreia is intended to test the player on the basic philosophical issues of the Star Wars universe . She is rude and dismissive to everyone but the player character , something intended to help make the player feel special . 
 English actress Sara Kestelman voiced the character in the game . In voice directors Will Beckman and Darragh O 'Farrell 's " Designer Diary " , the character was considered the most critical character to cast , though a challenging one as few games casted women of her age group . Obsidian worked hard in finding Kreia 's voice , which had to match with her model without being " witchy or grating " due to her lengthy amount of dialogue . 
 Developers tried to give each companion a unique ability to make them distinct from any other companion . Originally , throughout The Sith Lords Kreia would be seen through cutscenes recruiting certain characters such as Hanharr to side with her and seducing them to the dark side , though her exact purpose was not made overt . At the end of the game , they would then be used as " cannon fodder " before the fight with her began . Ultimately , this was cut . 
 = = Character = = 
 Kreia is shown as an elderly blind woman , whose eyes have atrophied from lack of use in preference of viewing things through the Force , viewing normal sight as a distraction . Dialogue in The Sith Lords establishes her past as a Jedi historian and one of the teachers of Revan , who became a Sith Lord and was the player character of the first game , and how her teachings were blamed for his fall . The Sith Lords reveals she as Sith trained two antagonists of the game , Darth Sion and Darth Nihilus , before they cast her out . She is initially depicted in earth @-@ brown hooded Jedi robes with empty white eyes , though after the revelation of her identity as Darth Traya , both a Sith and a being of betrayal , both her robes and eyes are changed to black , and she becomes more pale . 
 Kreia was the personification of Avellone 's frustrations with the concept of the Force . He called her " one redeeming feature " her love of the player character , and what they represent : a way of destroying the Force and its predestination in favor of giving freedom to the galaxy . She shuns the light @-@ side and the dark @-@ side divide of the Force , as well as blanket good and evil , favouring choices that grant the player control . The A.V. Club 's Jake Muncy described her philosophy as " a pessimistic and borderline @-@ Randian way of thinking focused on the importance of power and strife " . 
 She is initially presented as an ally and a teacher , and acts a mentor from the start of the game . Alexander Gambotto @-@ Burke of Eurogamer commented that she has a " genuine , albeit twisted maternal " love for the player , her student . In contrast to Darth Malak , the clear villain of the first game , Avellone called Kreia neither " necessarily good or evil " ; instead , she merely wants the Exile to grow as a person . Kreia is deliberately complicated in her goals and motivations , giving the character a feel of mystery . IGN 's Hilary Goldstein noted this mystery , commenting both on her seemingly dark motives and yet how she appears as the player 's " staunchest defender and a true protector " . 
 = = In The Sith Lords = = 
 The game was first released in December 2004 , on Xbox , marking the character 's debut . Kreia initially seems dead when introduced , but after the player character , an exile of the Jedi Order , enters the morgue of the mining station they 've woken in , she begins conversation . She informs the player that while they slept they both formed a Force bond , tying the Exile and Kreia together . It is revealed that Kreia and the Exile both came in aboard the Ebon Hawk after the Exile 's original ship was attacked by the Sith and the Exile rescued while unconscious . During their escape , Kreia encounters Darth Sion and loses her hand during the battle , which in turn causes the Exile tremendous pain due to their bond . After she rejoins the party and they escape the station on the Ebon Hawk , Kreia then appoints herself the Exile 's " teacher " . 
 Kreia serves as a party member throughout the game , and may interject at certain points of it to offer her perspective . Depending on each decision the player makes , Kreia may gain or lose " Influence " , which measures how much " trust , confidence , or control " the player has with a party member . Unlike other party members , Kreia 's alignment is not affected by the player 's Influence level with her and is instead set at neutral , though Influence will unlock new conversations with her . In gameplay , she may only equip one hand , and is a " Jedi Consular " , focused on using the game 's Force powers . Having her in the party grants the player extra experience , and any Force effects the player character or Kreia use on themself will also effect the other . 
 After the player either finds all the in @-@ hiding Jedi Masters to discuss the Sith threat or kills them for vengeance , Kreia will retake her mantle as a Sith Lord . If the player does not kill the Jedi , she will intervene when they attempt to cut the Exile off from the Force , draining the Jedi of the Force herself and killing them . If the player chooses to kill the Jedi , she will renounce the Exile . Either way , she will leave , and the player must hunt her down to Malachor V , a planet and a site of great atrocities and death during a previous war , causing a wound in the Force . Kreia seemingly plans on creating another wound in the Force there , deafening all to the Force and causing its " death " , as well as potentially killing all those touched by it . The player faces Kreia , now " Darth Traya " , as the final boss , and after she is defeated she offers to describe the future she foresees before dying . 
 = = Later appearances = = 
 The character would make no more future appearances in Star Wars fiction . However , Kreia is mentioned in several Star Wars reference books , such as Jedi vs. Sith : The Essential Guide to the Force and the second volume of The Complete Star Wars Encyclopedia . In addition , Wizards of the Coast created a miniature for the character , along with other characters in the Knights of the Old Republic series , which was released August 19 , 2008 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Kreia has been positively received . Alexander Gambotto @-@ Burke , for Eurogamer , considered Kreia to be the greatest villain in video gaming , praising her dialogue , Kestelman 's " intelligent and subtle " voice @-@ acting , and the way she forced the player into making choices and considering their decisions . IGN 's Hilary Goldstein offered similar praise to her dialogue . When looking at morality in games , Gamasutra 's Katherine Cross noted how Kreia 's comments affected her more than many of the dark @-@ side / light @-@ side choices in the game . Her " practical " philosophy was also complimented by Kotaku 's Phil Owen , who noted its ties to reality over the traditional moral extremes of the Sith and the Jedi . Eurogamer 's Richard Cobbett considered her the most " famous " of The Sith Lords ' subversion of Star Wars and the first Knights of the Old Republic , commenting " Whether you agree or think she 's crazy , she 's a fresh breath of air for the series , and easily one of the best RPG characters ever . " 
 The character is often considered The Sith Lord 's greatest or most important character . Jake Muncy of The A.V. Club said she was the greatest part of the game and called her the game 's most " captivating " character , which he credited to her " cold charisma " . Muncy found himself genuinely changing his character based on her opinions , overly caring about how Kreia viewed his character . Similarly , PC Gamer credited Kreia with The Sith Lords 's success , calling her " clearly haunted , bitter , manipulative , and yet right in so many ways " . By looking at the Star Wars world through the view of her philosophy , they felt Obsidian made " the most thoughtful take on Star Wars we 'll ever get " . Robert <unk> , writing for Eurogamer , called her " the strongest and most memorable character " in the game , praising her writing and how she embodied The Sith Lords 's gray areas . Allen Rausch of GameSpy described her as the game 's most compelling character , commending Kreia for her challenges to his choices and noting how one example , concerning the importance of lightsabers , changed his view of the game . 
 The character has appeared in numerous lists , often reflecting her good reception as a Star Wars character . IGN placed her at 81 in " The Top 100 Star Wars Characters " , noting her <unk> . She , along with the other Sith Lords in the game , came second @-@ place in a modified list of the best Star Wars villains , based on reader requests for characters left out of the original list . The Lords of both the first and second Knights of the Old Republic were similarly grouped as some of gaming 's best Star Wars characters by Joe Juba of Game Informer , calling most of them " cooler and better developed " than the Sith Lords in the actual Star Wars films . The character was ranked seventh among Game Informer 's " Top Ten Female Villains in Video Games " by Liz Lanier , saying that " Kreia is one of the few female Sith Lords of the Star Wars universe , but she represents women of the dark side relatively ruthlessly . " The " struggle " against her was called one of " 25 greatest Star Wars moments in Xbox history " by Edwin Evans @-@ Thirlwell writing for GamesRadar , who called her reveal of her agenda " compelling " despite being exposition . 
 Not all reception of the character was positive . Adam Rosenburg of UGO Networks listed Kreia as one of the worst Star Wars expanded universe characters , considering her at the center of Knights of the Old Republic II 's " stupidity " and criticizing her Sith name . Gamasutra 's Christopher Buecheler , the " Resident Cynic " , found Kreia 's comments " a bit trite and condescending " . Buecheler also faulted how gaining Influence with Kreia was essential in understanding the main plot of the game . 
 In a moment described as " ( in ) famous " by Cross , on Nar Shaddaa the player may give a beggar money or leave him ; if he is given the money , Kreia shows how he is made a target of and attacked , and if he is refused Kreia reveals he attacks others . Owen called this moment the crystallization of the game 's gray areas . Anthony Brock of Gamers Hell noted how it led to him passionately arguing with a game character , complimenting Obsidian for how involved he felt . Cobbett similarly highlighted the moment when praising the character . Buecheler , however , criticized the scene for using an unlikely chance event to make its point . 
 Kreia won " Best Character " in GameSpy 's 2005 game of the year awards . They called her a " deeply unpleasant , highly disturbing , and incredibly hateful person " , but also " easily the most intriguing , complicated , enigmatic , well @-@ designed and nuanced character in a video game [ in 2005 ] " . She was also nominated for GameSpot 's 2004 " Best New Character " award , though lost to " The Boss " in Metal Gear Solid 3 : Snake Eater . 
 = = = Avellone retrospective = = = 
 Avellone has said he felt he failed in creating a sympathetic Sith Lord , recalling <unk> by QA testers referring to her as " that crusty annoying lady , " and he considered the ending 's explanations of her motivations more " hamfisted " than sympathetic . However , in an interview with 1UP.com he called Kreia , along with the Handmaiden , his favorite character after T3 @-@ M4 , citing the mystery surrounding her . He called his favorite " unexpected turn " in the game the revelation of Kreia being neither fully good nor evil . In another interview , this time with Star Wars fansite EU Cantina , he called his favorite character either Kreia or T3 , and called her scene where she explains her relationship with the Force one of his favorites in the game . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Alexander Gambotto @-@ Burke felt the character was a presentation of Avellone 's criticisms of the Star Wars mythos and the morality presented in most post @-@ Garriott video games , and called her " a tutorial , an incentive to explore moral avenues you might have otherwise ignored " . Gambotto @-@ Burke considered her not purely evil , and felt even at the end of the game " you can 't help but see her as a flawed visionary " . GameSpot considered it the point to be for the player to move on from her " self @-@ defeating " nihilism and realize " the act of choice is what gives form and pattern to the universe " . 
 In her piece analysing game morality , Katherine Cross highlighted the beggar scene on Nar Shaddaa . Cross noted how it illustrated Kreia 's morality , shed doubt on " <unk> " moral acts , and highlighted the player 's own powerlessness . Hilary Goldstein noted how her philosophical points questioned the roles of the Jedi and the Sith . 
 = East End of London = 
 The East End of London , also known simply as the East End , is an area of London , England , east of the Roman and medieval walled City of London and north of the River Thames . Although not defined by universally accepted formal boundaries , the River Lea can be considered the eastern boundary . For the purposes of his book , East End Past , Richard <unk> regards the area as coterminous with the London Borough of Tower Hamlets : however , he acknowledges that this narrow definition excludes parts of southern Hackney , such as Shoreditch and Hoxton , which many would regard as belonging to the East End . Others again , such as Alan Palmer , would extend the area across the Lea to include parts of the London Borough of Newham ; while parts of the London Borough of Waltham Forest and London Borough of Hackney are also sometimes included . It is universally agreed , however , that the East End is to be distinguished from East London , which covers a much wider area . 
 Use of the term East End in a pejorative sense began in the late 19th century , as the expansion of the population of London led to extreme overcrowding throughout the area and a concentration of poor people and immigrants . The problems were exacerbated with the construction of St Katharine Docks ( 1827 ) and the central London railway termini ( 1840 – 1875 ) that caused the clearance of former slums and rookeries , with many of the displaced people moving into the East End . Over the course of a century , the East End became synonymous with poverty , overcrowding , disease and criminality . 
 The East End developed rapidly during the 19th century . Originally it was an area characterised by villages clustered around the City walls or along the main roads , surrounded by farmland , with marshes and small communities by the River , serving the needs of shipping and the Royal Navy . Until the arrival of formal docks , shipping was required to land its goods in the Pool of London , but industries related to construction , repair , and victualling of ships flourished in the area from Tudor times . The area attracted large numbers of rural people looking for employment . Successive waves of foreign immigration began with Huguenot refugees creating a new extramural suburb in Spitalfields in the 17th century . They were followed by Irish weavers , Ashkenazi Jews and , in the 20th century , Bangladeshis . Many of these immigrants worked in the clothing industry . The abundance of semi- and unskilled labour led to low wages and poor conditions throughout the East End . This brought the attentions of social reformers during the mid @-@ 18th century and led to the formation of unions and workers associations at the end of the century . The radicalism of the East End contributed to the formation of the Labour Party , and Sylvia Pankhurst based campaigns for women 's votes in the area and organised the first Communist Party in England here . 
 Official attempts to address the overcrowded housing began at the beginning of the 20th century under the London County Council . The Second World War devastated much of the East End , with its docks , railways and industry forming a continual target for bombing , especially during the Blitz , leading to dispersal of the population to new suburbs and new housing being built in the 1950s . The closure of the last of the East End docks in the Port of London in 1980 created further challenges and led to attempts at regeneration and the formation of the London Docklands Development Corporation . The Canary Wharf development , improved infrastructure , and the Olympic Park mean that the East End is undergoing further change , but some parts continue to contain some of the worst poverty in Britain . 
 = = Origin and scope = = 
 The term ' East End ' was first applied to the districts immediately to the east of , and entirely outside , the medieval walled City of London and north of the River Thames ; these included Whitechapel and Stepney . 
 The East End began with the medieval growth of London beyond the walls , mainly along the Roman Roads leading from Bishopsgate and Aldgate . 
 Growth was much slower in the east , and the modest extensions on this side were separated from the much larger extensions in the west by the marshy open area of Moorfields adjacent to the wall on the north side which discouraged development in that direction . 
 Building accelerated in the 1500s and the area that would later become known East End began to take shape . 
 In 1720 John Strype gives us our first record of the East End as a distinct entity when he describes London as consisting of four parts : The City of London , Westminster , Southwark and " That Part Beyond the Tower " . 
 Moorfields wasn 't developed until 1777 @-@ 1812 and the longstanding presence of that open space separating the east and west urban expansions of London must have helped shape the varying economic character of the two parts and perceptions of their distinct identity ( see map below ) . 
 By the late 19th century , the East End roughly corresponded to the Tower division of Middlesex , which from 1900 formed the metropolitan boroughs of Stepney , Bethnal Green , Poplar and Shoreditch in the County of London . Today it corresponds to the London Borough of Tower Hamlets and the southern part of Hackney . 
 [ The ] invention about 1880 of the term ' East End ' was rapidly taken up by the new halfpenny press , and in the pulpit and the music hall ... A shabby man from Paddington , St Marylebone or Battersea might pass muster as one of the respectable poor . But the same man coming from Bethnal Green , Shadwell or Wapping was an ' East Ender ' , the box of Keating 's bug powder must be reached for , and the spoons locked up . In the long run this cruel stigma came to do good . It was a final incentive to the poorest to get out of the ' East End ' at all costs , and it became a concentrated reminder to the public conscience that nothing to be found in the ' East End ' should be tolerated in a Christian country . 
 Parts of the London boroughs of Newham and Waltham Forest , formerly in an area of Essex known as ' London over the border ' , are sometimes considered to be in the East End . However , the River Lea is usually considered to be the eastern boundary of the East End and this definition would exclude the boroughs , but place them in east London . This extension of the term further east is due to the ' diaspora ' of East Enders who moved to West Ham about 1886 and East Ham about 1894 to service the new docks and industries established there . In the inter @-@ war period , migration occurred to new estates built to alleviate conditions in the East End , in particular at Becontree and Harold Hill , or out of London entirely . 
 The extent of the East End has always been difficult to define . When Jack London came to London in 1902 his Hackney carriage driver did not know the way and he observed , " Thomas Cook and Son , path @-@ finders and trail @-@ <unk> , living sign @-@ posts to all the World .... knew not the way to the East End " . 
 Many East Enders are ' <unk> ' , although this term has both a geographic and a linguistic connotation . A traditional definition is that to be a Cockney , one had to be born within the sound of Bow Bells , situated in Cheapside . In general , the sound pattern would cover most of the City , and parts of the near East End such as Aldgate and Whitechapel , but it is unlikely that the bells would have been heard in the docklands . In practice , with Royal London the only maternal hospital nearby , today few would be born in the area . 
 Its linguistic use is more identifiable , with lexical borrowings from Yiddish , Romani , and <unk> slang , and a distinctive accent that features T @-@ <unk> , a loss of dental fricatives and diphthong alterations , amongst others . The accent is said to be a remnant of early English London speech , modified by the many immigrants to the area . The Cockney accent has suffered a long decline , beginning with the introduction in the 20th century of received pronunciation , and the more recent adoption of Estuary English , which itself contains many features of Cockney English . 
 = = History = = 
 The East End came into being as the separate villages east of London spread and the fields between them were built upon , a process that occurred in the late 18th and early 19th centuries . From the beginning , the East End has always contained some of the poorest areas of London . The main reasons for this include the following : 
 the medieval system of copyhold , which prevailed throughout the East End , into the 19th century . Essentially , there was little point in developing land that was held on short leases . 
 the siting of noxious industries , such as tanning and fulling downwind outside the boundaries of the City , and therefore beyond complaints and official controls . The foul @-@ smelling industries partially preferred the East End because the prevailing winds in London traveled from west to east ( i.e. it was downwind from the rest of the city ) , meaning that most odors from their businesses would not go into the city but outside , and thereby reduced complaints . 
 the low paid employment in the docks and related industries , made worse by the trade practices of outwork , piecework and casual labour . 
 and the concentration of the ruling court and national political epicentre in Westminster , on the opposite western side of the City of London . 
 Historically , the East End is <unk> with the Manor of Stepney . This manor was held by the Bishop of London , in compensation for his duties in maintaining and garrisoning the Tower of London . Further ecclesiastic holdings came about from the need to enclose the marshes and create flood defences along the Thames . Edward VI passed the land to the Wentworth family , and thence to their descendants , the Earls of Cleveland . The ecclesiastic system of copyhold , whereby land was leased to tenants for terms as short as seven years , prevailed throughout the manor . This severely limited scope for improvement of the land and new building until the estate was broken up in the 19th century . 
 In medieval times trades were carried out in workshops in and around the owners ' premises in the City . By the time of the Great Fire these were becoming industries and some were particularly noisome , such as the processing of urine to perform tanning ; or required large amounts of space , such as drying clothes after process and dying in fields known as <unk> ; and rope making . Some were dangerous , such as the manufacture of gunpowder or the proving of guns . These activities came to be performed outside the City walls in the near suburbs of the East End . Later when lead making and bone processing for soap and china came to be established , they too located in the East End rather than the crowded streets of the City . 
 The lands to the east of the City had always been used as hunting grounds for bishops and royalty , with King John establishing a palace at Bow . The Cistercian Stratford Langthorne Abbey became the court of Henry III in 1267 for the visitation of the Papal legates , and it was here that he made peace with the barons under the terms of the Dictum of Kenilworth . It became the fifth largest Abbey in the country , visited by monarchs and providing a popular retreat ( and final resting place ) for the nobility . The Palace of Placentia at Greenwich , to the south of the river , was built by the Regent to Henry V , Humphrey , Duke of Gloucester and Henry VIII established a hunting lodge at Bromley Hall . These Royal connections continued until after the Interregnum when the Court established itself in the Palace of Whitehall and the offices of politics congregated around them . The East End also lay on the main road to Barking Abbey , important as a religious centre since Norman times and where William the Conqueror had first established his English court . 
 = = = Politics and social reform = = = 
 At the end of the 17th century large numbers of Huguenot weavers arrived in the East End , settling to service an industry that grew up around the new estate at Spitalfields , where master weavers were based . They brought with them a tradition of ' reading clubs ' , where books were read , often in public houses . The authorities were suspicious of immigrants meeting and in some ways they were right to be as these grew into workers ' associations and political organisations . Towards the middle of the 18th century the silk industry fell into a decline – partly due to the introduction of printed calico cloth – and riots ensued . These ' <unk> Riots ' of 1769 were actually centred to the east and were put down with considerable force , culminating in two men being hanged in front of the Salmon and Ball public house at Bethnal Green . One was John Doyle ( an Irish weaver ) , the other John <unk> ( of Huguenot descent ) . 
 In 1844 , " An Association for promoting Cleanliness among the Poor " was established , and it built a bath @-@ house and laundry in Glasshouse Yard , East Smithfield . This cost a single penny for bathing or washing and by June 1847 was receiving 4 @,@ 284 people a year . This led to an Act of Parliament to encourage other municipalities to build their own and the model spread quickly throughout the East End . Timbs noted that " ... so strong was the love of cleanliness thus encouraged that women often toiled to wash their own and their children 's clothing , who had been compelled to sell their hair to purchase food to satisfy the cravings of hunger " . 
 William Booth began his ' Christian Revival Society ' in 1865 , preaching the gospel in a tent erected in the ' Friends Burial Ground ' , Thomas Street , Whitechapel . Others joined his ' Christian Mission ' , and on 7 August 1878 the Salvation Army was formed at a meeting held at 272 Whitechapel Road . A statue commemorates both his mission and his work in helping the poor . Dubliner Thomas John Barnardo came to the London Hospital , Whitechapel to train for medical missionary work in China . Soon after his arrival in 1866 a cholera epidemic swept the East End killing 3 @,@ 000 people . Many families were left destitute , with thousands of children orphaned and forced to beg or find work in the factories . In 1867 , Barnardo set up a Ragged School to provide a basic education but was shown the many children sleeping rough . His first home for boys was established at 18 Stepney Causeway in 1870 . When a boy died after being turned away ( the home was full ) , the policy was instituted that ' No Destitute Child Ever Refused Admission ' . 
 In 1884 , the Settlement movement was founded , with settlements such as Toynbee Hall and Oxford House , to encourage university students to live and work in the slums , experience the conditions and try to alleviate some of the poverty and misery in the East End . Notable residents of Toynbee Hall included R. H. Tawney , Clement Attlee , Guglielmo Marconi , and William Beveridge . The Hall continues to exert considerable influence , with the Workers Educational Association ( 1903 ) , Citizens Advice Bureau ( 1949 ) and Child Poverty Action Group ( 1965 ) all being founded or influenced by it . In 1888 , the <unk> of Bryant and May in Bow went on strike for better working conditions . This , combined with the many dock strikes in the same era , made the East End a key element in the foundation of modern socialist and trade union organisations , as well as the Suffragette movement . 
 Towards the end of the 19th century , a new wave of radicalism came to the East End , arriving both with Jewish émigrés fleeing from Eastern European persecution , and Russian and German radicals avoiding arrest . A German émigré anarchist , Rudolf Rocker , began writing in Yiddish for <unk> <unk> ( Workers ' Friend ) . By 1912 , he had organised a mass London garment workers ' strike for better conditions and an end to ' sweating ' . Amongst the Russians was fellow anarchist Peter Kropotkin who helped found the Freedom Press in Whitechapel . Afanasy Matushenko , one of the leaders of the Potemkin mutiny , fled the failure of the Russian Revolution of 1905 to seek sanctuary in Stepney Green . Leon Trotsky and Vladimir Lenin attended meetings of the newspaper Iskra in 1903 @.@ in Whitechapel ; and in 1907 Lenin and Joseph Stalin attended the Fifth Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party held in a Hoxton church . That congress consolidated the leadership of Lenin 's Bolshevik faction and debated strategy for the communist revolution in Russia . Trotsky noted , in his memoires , meeting Maxim Gorky and Rosa Luxemburg at the conference . 
 By the 1880s , the casual system caused Dock workers to unionise under Ben Tillett and John Burns . This led to a demand for ' 6d per hour ' ( The Docker 's Tanner ) , and an end to casual labour in the docks . Colonel G. R. Birt , the general manager at Millwall Docks , gave evidence to a Parliamentary committee , on the physical condition of the workers : 
 The poor fellows are miserably clad , scarcely with a boot on their foot , in a most miserable state .... These are men who come to work in our docks who come on without having a bit of food in their stomachs , perhaps since the previous day ; they have worked for an hour and have earned 5d . [ 2p ] ; their hunger will not allow them to continue : they take the <unk> in order that they may get food , perhaps the first food they have had for twenty @-@ four hours . 
 These conditions earned dockers much public sympathy , and after a bitter struggle , the London Dock Strike of 1889 was settled with victory for the strikers , and established a national movement for the unionisation of casual workers , as opposed to the craft unions that already existed . 
 The philanthropist Angela Burdett @-@ Coutts was active in the East End , alleviating poverty by founding a sewing school for ex @-@ weavers in Spitalfields and building the ornate Columbia Market in Bethnal Green . She helped to inaugurate the London Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children , was a keen supporter of the ' Ragged School Union ' , and operated housing schemes similar to those of the Model Dwellings Companies such as the East End Dwellings Company and the Four Per Cent Industrial Dwellings Company , where investors received a financial return on their philanthropy . Between the 1890s and 1903 , when the work was published , the social campaigner Charles Booth instigated an investigation into the life of London poor ( based at Toynbee Hall ) , much of which was centred on the poverty and conditions in the East End . Further investigations were instigated by the ' Royal Commission on the Poor Laws and Relief of Distress 1905 @-@ 09 ' , the Commission found it difficult to agree , beyond that change was necessary and produced separate minority and majority reports . The minority report was the work of Booth with the founders of the London School of Economics Sidney and Beatrice Webb . They advocated focusing on the causes of poverty and the radical notion of poverty being involuntary , rather than the result of innate indolence . At the time their work was rejected but was gradually adopted as policy by successive governments . 
 Sylvia Pankhurst became increasingly disillusioned with the suffragette movement 's inability to engage with the needs of working class women , so in 1912 she formed her own breakaway movement , the East London Federation of Suffragettes . She based it at a baker 's shop at Bow emblazoned with the slogan , " Votes for Women " , in large gold letters . The local Member of Parliament , George Lansbury , resigned his seat in the House of Commons to stand for election on a platform of women 's enfranchisement . Pankhurst supported him in this , and Bow Road became the campaign office , culminating in a huge rally in nearby Victoria Park . Lansbury was narrowly defeated in the election , however , and support for the project in the East End was withdrawn . Pankhurst refocused her efforts , and with the outbreak of the First World War , she began a nursery , clinic and cost price canteen for the poor at the bakery . A paper , the Women 's Dreadnought , was published to bring her campaign to a wider audience . Pankhurst spent twelve years in Bow fighting for women 's rights . During this time , she risked constant arrest and spent many months in Holloway Prison , often on hunger strike . She finally achieved her aim of full adult female suffrage in 1928 , and along the way she alleviated some of the poverty and misery , and improved social conditions for all in the East End . 
 The alleviation of widespread unemployment and hunger in Poplar had to be funded from money raised by the borough itself under the Poor Law . The poverty of the borough made this patently unfair and lead to the 1921 conflict between government and the local councillors known as the Poplar Rates Rebellion . Council meetings were for a time held in Brixton prison , and the councillors received wide support . Ultimately , this led to the abolition of the Poor Laws through the Local Government Act 1929 . 
 The General Strike had begun as a dispute between miners and their employers outside London in 1925 . On 1 May 1926 the Trades Union Congress called out workers all over the country , including the London dockers . The government had had over a year to prepare and deployed troops to break the dockers ' picket lines . Armed food convoys , accompanied by armoured cars drove down the East India Dock Road . By 10 May , a meeting was brokered at Toynbee Hall to end the strike . The TUC were forced into a humiliating <unk> and the general strike ended on 11 May , with the miners holding out until November . 
 = = = Industry and built environment = = = 
 Industries associated with the sea developed throughout the East End , including rope making and shipbuilding . The former location of <unk> can still be identified from their long straight , narrow profile in the modern streets , for instance <unk> Street near Mile End . Shipbuilding was important from the time when Henry VIII caused ships to be built at Rotherhithe as a part of his expansion of the Royal Navy . On 31 January 1858 , the largest ship of that time , the SS Great Eastern , designed by Isambard Kingdom Brunel , was launched from the yard of Messrs Scott Russell & Co , of Millwall . The 692 @-@ foot ( 211 m ) vessel was too long to fit across the river , and so the ship had to be launched sideways . Due to the technical difficulties of the launch , this was the last big ship to be built on the River , and the industry fell into a long decline . Smaller ships , including battleships , continued to be built at the Thames Ironworks and Shipbuilding Company at Blackwall until the beginning of the 20th century . 
 The West India Docks were established in 1803 , providing berths for larger ships and a model for future London dock building . Imported produce from the West Indies was unloaded directly into quayside warehouses . Ships were limited to 6000 tons . The old Brunswick Dock , a shipyard at Blackwall became the basis for the East India Company 's East India Docks established there in 1806 . The London Docks were built in 1805 , and the waste soil and rubble from the construction was carried by barge to west London , to build up the marshy area of Pimlico . These docks imported tobacco , wine , wool and other goods into guarded warehouses within high walls ( some of which still remain ) . They were able to berth over 300 sailing vessels simultaneously , but by 1971 they closed , no longer able to accommodate modern shipping . The most central docks , St Katharine Docks , were built in 1828 to accommodate luxury goods , clearing the slums that lay in the area of the former Hospital of St Katharine . They were not successful commercially , as they were unable to accommodate the largest ships , and in 1864 , management of the docks was amalgamated with that of the London Docks . The Millwall Docks were created in 1868 , predominantly for the import of grain and timber . These docks housed the first purpose built granary for the Baltic grain market , a local landmark that remained until it was demolished to improve access for the London City Airport . 
 The first railway ( ' The Commercial Railway ' ) to be built , in 1840 , was a passenger service based on cable haulage by stationary steam engines that ran the 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) from <unk> to Blackwall on a pair of tracks . It required 14 miles ( 22 @.@ 5 km ) of hemp rope , and ' dropped ' carriages as it arrived at stations , which were reattached to the cable for the return journey , and the train ' reassembling ' itself at the terminus . The line was converted to standard gauge in 1859 , and steam locomotives adopted . The building of London termini at Fenchurch Street ( 1841 ) , and Bishopsgate ( 1840 ) provided access to new suburbs across the River Lea , again resulting in the destruction of housing and increased overcrowding in the slums . After the opening of Liverpool Street station ( 1874 ) , Bishopsgate railway station became a goods yard , in 1881 , to bring imports from Eastern ports . With the introduction of containerisation , the station declined , suffered a fire in 1964 that destroyed the station buildings , and it was finally demolished in 2004 for the extension of the East London Line . In the 19th century , the area north of Bow Road became a major railway centre for the North London Railway , with marshalling yards and a maintenance depot serving both the City and the West India docks . Nearby Bow railway station opened in 1850 and was rebuilt in 1870 in a grand style , featuring a concert hall . The line and yards closed in 1944 , after severe bomb damage , and never reopened , as goods became less significant , and cheaper facilities were concentrated in Essex . 
 The River Lea was a smaller boundary than the Thames , but it was a significant one . The building of the Royal Docks consisting of the Royal Victoria Dock ( 1855 ) , able to berth vessels of up to 8000 tons ; Royal Albert Dock ( 1880 ) , up to 12 @,@ 000 tons ; and King George V Dock ( 1921 ) , up to 30 @,@ 000 tons , on the estuary marshes , extended the continuous development of London across the Lea into Essex for the first time . The railways gave access to a passenger terminal at Gallions Reach and new suburbs created in West Ham , which quickly became a major manufacturing town , with 30 @,@ 000 houses built between 1871 and 1901 . Soon afterwards , East Ham was built up to serve the new Gas Light and Coke Company and Bazalgette 's grand sewage works at Beckton . 
 From the mid @-@ 20th century , the docks declined in use and were finally closed in 1980 , leading to the setting up of the London Docklands Development Corporation in 1981 . London 's main port is now at Tilbury , further down the Thames estuary , outside the boundary of Greater London . The dock had been established in 1886 to bring bulk goods by rail to London , but being nearer the sea and able to accommodate vessels of 50 @,@ 000 tons , they were more easily converted to the needs of modern container ships in 1968 , and so they survived the closure of the inner docks . Various wharves along the river continue in use but on a much smaller scale . 
 = = = Settlement = = = 
 During the Middle Ages , settlements had been established predominantly along the lines of the existing roads , and the principal villages were Stepney , Whitechapel and Bow . Settlements along the river began at this time to service the needs of shipping on the Thames , but the City of London retained its right to actually land the goods . The riverside became more active in Tudor times , as the Royal Navy was expanded and international trading developed . Downstream , a major fishing port developed at Barking to provide fish to the City . 
 Whereas royalty such as King John had had a hunting lodge at Bromley @-@ by @-@ Bow , and the Bishop of London had a palace at Bethnal Green , later these estates began to be split up , and estates of fine houses for captains , merchants and owners of manufacturers began to be built . Samuel Pepys moved his family and goods to Bethnal Green during the Great Fire of London , and Captain Cook moved from Shadwell to Stepney Green , a place where a school and assembly rooms had been established ( commemorated by Assembly Passage , and a plaque on the site of Cook 's house on the Mile End Road ) . Mile End Old Town also acquired some fine buildings , and the New Town began to be built . As the area became built up and more crowded , the wealthy sold their plots for sub @-@ division and moved further afield . Into the 18th and 19th centuries , there were still attempts to build fine houses , for example Tredegar Square ( 1830 ) , and the open fields around Mile End New Town were used for the construction of estates of workers ' cottages in 1820 . This was designed in 1817 in Birmingham by Anthony Hughes and finally constructed in 1820 
 Globe Town was established from 1800 to provide for the expanding population of weavers around Bethnal Green , attracted by improving prospects in silk weaving . The population of Bethnal Green trebled between 1801 and 1831 , with 20 @,@ 000 looms being operated in people 's own homes . By 1824 , with restrictions on importation of French silks relaxed , up to half these looms had become idle , and prices were driven down . With many importing warehouses already established in the district , the abundance of cheap labour was turned to boot , furniture and clothing manufacture . Globe Town continued its expansion into the 1860s , long after the decline of the silk industry . 
 During the 19th century , building on an <unk> basis could never keep up with the needs of the expanding population . Henry Mayhew visited Bethnal Green in 1850 and wrote for the Morning Chronicle , as a part of a series forming the basis for London Labour and the London Poor ( 1851 ) , that the trades in the area included tailors , <unk> , shoemakers , <unk> , sawyers , carpenters , cabinet makers and <unk> . He noted that in the area : 
 roads were unmade , often mere alleys , houses small and without foundations , subdivided and often around unpaved courts . An almost total lack of drainage and sewerage was made worse by the ponds formed by the excavation of brickearth . Pigs and cows in back yards , noxious trades like boiling tripe , melting tallow , or preparing cat 's meat , and slaughter houses , <unk> , and ' lakes of putrefying night soil ' added to the filth 
 A movement began to clear the slums – with Burdett @-@ Coutts building Columbia Market in 1869 and with the passing of the " Artisans ' and Labourers ' Dwelling Act " in 1876 to provide powers to seize slums from landlords and provide access to public funds to build new housing . Housing associations such as the Peabody Trust were formed to provide philanthropic homes for the poor and clearing the slums generally . Expansion work by the railway companies , such as the London and Blackwall Railway and Great Eastern Railway , caused large areas of slum housing to be demolished . The " Working Classes Dwellings Act " in 1890 placed a new responsibility to house the displaced residents and this led to the building of new " philanthropic housing " such as Blackwall Buildings and Great Eastern Buildings . 
 By 1890 official slum clearance programmes had begun . One was the creation of the world 's first council housing , the LCC Boundary Estate , which replaced the neglected and crowded streets of Friars Mount , better known as The Old Nichol Street Rookery . Between 1918 and 1939 the LCC continued replacing East End housing with five or six storey flats , despite residents preferring houses with gardens and opposition from shopkeepers who were forced to relocate to new , more expensive premises . The Second World War brought an end to further slum clearance . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 Hardest of all , the Luftwaffe will smash Stepney . I know the East End ! Those dirty Jews and <unk> will run like rabbits into their holes . 
 Initially , the German commanders were reluctant to bomb London , fearing retaliation against Berlin . On 24 August 1940 , a single aircraft , tasked to bomb Tilbury , accidentally bombed Stepney , Bethnal Green and the City . The following night the RAF retaliated by mounting a forty aircraft raid on Berlin , with a second attack three days later . The Luftwaffe changed its strategy from attacking shipping and airfields to attacking cities . The City and West End were designated ' Target Area B ' ; the East End and docks were ' Target Area A ' . The first raid occurred at 4 : 30 p.m. on 7 September and consisted of 150 Dornier and Heinkel bombers and large numbers of fighters . This was followed by a second wave of 170 bombers . Silvertown and Canning Town bore the brunt of this first attack . 
 Between 7 September 1940 and 10 May 1941 , a sustained bombing campaign was mounted . It began with the bombing of London for 57 successive nights , an era known as ' the Blitz ' . East London was targeted because the area was a centre for imports and storage of raw materials for the war effort , and the German military command felt that support for the war could be damaged among the mainly working class inhabitants . On the first night of the Blitz , 430 civilians were killed and 1 @,@ 600 seriously wounded . The populace responded by evacuating children and the vulnerable to the country and digging in , constructing Anderson shelters in their gardens and Morrison shelters in their houses , or going to communal shelters built in local public spaces . On 10 September 1940 , 73 civilians , including women and children preparing for evacuation , were killed when a bomb hit the South <unk> School . Although the official death toll is 73 , many local people believed it must have been higher . Some estimates say 400 or even 600 may have lost their lives during this raid on Canning Town . 
 The effect of the intensive bombing worried the authorities and ' Mass @-@ Observation ' was deployed to gauge attitudes and provide policy suggestions , as before the war they had investigated local attitudes to anti @-@ Semitism . The organisation noted that close family and friendship links within the East End were providing the population with a surprising resilience under fire . Propaganda was issued , reinforcing the image of the ' brave chirpy Cockney ' . On the Sunday after the Blitz began , Winston Churchill himself toured the bombed areas of Stepney and Poplar . Anti @-@ aircraft installations were built in public parks , such as Victoria Park and the <unk> on the Isle of Dogs , and along the line of the Thames , as this was used by the aircraft to guide them to their target . 
 The authorities were initially wary of opening the London Underground for shelter , fearing the effect on morale elsewhere in London and hampering normal operations . On 12 September , having suffered five days of heavy bombing , the people of the East End took the matter into their own hands and invaded tube stations with pillows and blankets . The government relented and opened the partially completed Central line as a shelter . Many deep tube stations remained in use as shelters until the end of the war . Aerial mines were deployed on 19 September 1940 . These exploded at roof top height , causing severe damage to buildings over a wider radius than the impact bombs . By now , the Port of London had sustained heavy damage with a third of its warehouses destroyed , and the West India and St Katherine Docks had been badly hit and put out of action . Bizarre events occurred when the River Lea burned with an eerie blue flame , caused by a hit on a gin factory at Three Mills , and the Thames itself burnt fiercely when Tate & Lyle 's Silvertown sugar refinery was hit . 
 On 3 March 1943 at 8 : 27 p.m. , the unopened Bethnal Green tube station was the site of a wartime disaster . Families had crowded into the underground station due to an air @-@ raid siren at 8 : 17 , one of 10 that day . There was a panic at 8 : 27 coinciding with the sound of an anti @-@ aircraft battery ( possibly the recently installed Z battery ) being fired at nearby Victoria Park . In the wet , dark conditions , a woman slipped on the entrance stairs and 173 people died in the resulting crush . The truth was suppressed , and a report appeared that there had been a direct hit by a German bomb . The results of the official investigation were not released until 1946 . There is now a plaque at the entrance to the tube station , which commemorates the event as the " worst civilian disaster of World War II " . The first V @-@ 1 flying bomb struck in Grove Road , Mile End , on 13 June 1944 , killing six , injuring 30 , and making 200 people homeless . The area remained derelict for many years until it was cleared to extend Mile End Park . Before demolition , local artist Rachel Whiteread made a cast of the inside of 193 Grove Road . Despite attracting controversy , the exhibit won her the Turner Prize for 1993 . 
 It is estimated that by the end of the war , 80 tons of bombs had fallen on the Metropolitan Borough of Bethnal Green alone , affecting 21 @,@ 700 houses , destroying 2 @,@ 233 and making a further 893 uninhabitable . In Bethnal Green , 555 people were killed , and 400 were seriously injured . For the whole of Tower Hamlets , a total of 2 @,@ 221 civilians were killed , and 7 @,@ 472 were injured , with 46 @,@ 482 houses destroyed and 47 @,@ 574 damaged . So badly battered was the East End that when Buckingham Palace was hit during the height of the bombing , Queen Elizabeth observed that " It makes me feel I can look the East End in the face . " By the end of the war , the East End was a scene of devastation , with large areas derelict and depopulated . War production was changed quickly to making prefabricated housing , and many were installed in the bombed areas and remained common into the 1970s . Today , 1950s and 1960s architecture dominates the housing estates of the area such as the Lansbury Estate in Poplar , much of which was built as a show @-@ piece of the 1951 Festival of Britain . 
 = = = Population = = = 
 Throughout history the area has absorbed waves of immigrants , who have each added a new dimension to the culture and history of the area , most notably the French Protestant Huguenots in the 17th century , the Irish in the 18th century , Ashkenazi Jews fleeing pogroms in Eastern Europe towards the end of the 19th century , and the Bangladeshi community settling in the East End from the 1960s . 
 = = = = Immigration = = = = 
 Immigrant communities first developed in the riverside settlements . From the Tudor era until the 20th century , ships ' crews were employed on a casual basis . New and replacement crew would be found wherever they were available , local sailors being particularly prized for their knowledge of currents and hazards in foreign ports . Crews would be paid off at the end of their voyage . Inevitably , permanent communities became established , including colonies of <unk> and Africans from the Guinea Coast . Large <unk> at both Shadwell and Limehouse developed , associated with the crews of merchantmen in the opium and tea trades . It was only after the devastation of the Second World War that this predominantly Han Chinese community relocated to Soho . 
 In 1786 , the Committee for the Relief of the Black Poor was formed by citizens concerned at the size of London 's indigent Black population , many of whom had been expelled from North America as Black Loyalists — former slaves who had fought on the side of the British in the War of Independence . Others were discharged sailors and some a legacy of British involvement in the slave trade . The committee distributed food , clothing , medical aid and found work for men , from various locations including the White Raven tavern in Mile End . They also helped the men to go abroad , some to Canada . In October 1786 , the Committee funded an ill @-@ fated expedition of 280 black men , 40 black women and 70 white women ( mainly wives and girlfriends ) to settle in Sierra Leone . From the late 19th century , a large African mariner community was established in Canning Town as a result of new shipping links to the Caribbean and West Africa . 
 Immigrants have not always been readily accepted and in 1517 the Evil May Day riots , where foreign @-@ owned property was attacked , resulted in the deaths of 135 Flemings in Stepney . The Gordon Riots of 1780 began with burnings of the houses of Catholics and their chapels in Poplar and Spitalfields . 
 In the 1870 and 80s , so many Jewish émigrés were arriving that over 150 synagogues were built . Today there are only four active synagogues remaining in Tower Hamlets : the Congregation of Jacob Synagogue ( 1903 – <unk> Ya 'akov ) , the East London Central Synagogue ( 1922 ) , the Fieldgate Street Great Synagogue ( 1899 ) and Sandys Row Synagogue ( 1766 ) . Jewish immigration to the East End peaked in the 1890s , leading to anti @-@ foreigner agitation by the British Brothers League , formed in 1902 by Captain William Stanley Shaw and the Conservative MP for Stepney , Major Evans @-@ Gordon , who had overturned a Liberal majority in the 1900 General Election on a platform of limiting immigration . In Parliament in 1902 , Evans @-@ Gordon claimed that " not a day passes but English families are ruthlessly turned out to make room for foreign invaders . The rates are burdened with the education of thousands of foreign children . " Jewish immigration only slowed with the passing of the Aliens Act 1905 , which gave the Home Secretary powers to regulate and control immigration . 
 At the beginning of the 20th century , London was the capital of the extensive British Empire , which contained tens of millions of Muslims , but had no mosque for Muslim residents or visitors . On 9 November 1910 , at a meeting of Muslims and non @-@ Muslims at the Ritz Hotel , the London Mosque Fund was established with the aims of organising weekly Friday prayers and providing a permanent place of worship for Muslims in London . From 1910 to 1940 various rooms had been hired for Jumu 'ah prayers on Fridays . Finally , in 1940 , three houses were purchased at 446 – 448 Commercial Road in the East End of London as a permanent place of prayer . On 2 August 1941 the combined houses were inaugurated as the ' East London Mosque and Islamic Culture Centre ' at a ceremony attended by the Egyptian Ambassador , Colonel Sir Gordon Neal ( representing the Secretary of State for India ) . The first prayer was led by the Ambassador for Saudi Arabia , Shaikh Hafiz <unk> . From the late 1950s the local Muslim population began to increase due to further immigration from the Indian subcontinent , particularly from Sylhet in East Pakistan , which became Bangladesh in 1971 . The migrants settled in areas already established by the <unk> expatriate community , working in the local docks and Jewish tailoring shops set up in the days of British India . During the 1970s , this immigration increased significantly . In 1975 the local authority bought the properties in Commercial Road under a compulsory purchase order , in return providing a site with temporary buildings on Whitechapel Road . The local community set about raising funds to erect a purpose @-@ built mosque on the site . King Fahd of Saudi Arabia donated £ 1 @.@ 1 million of the £ 2 million fund , and the governments of Kuwait and Britain also donated to the fund . Seven years later , the building of the new mosque commenced , with foundations laid in 1982 and construction completed in 1985 . It was one of the first mosques in the European Union to broadcast the adhan from the minaret using loudspeakers . Currently , the mosque has a capacity of 7 @,@ 000 , with prayer areas for men and women , and classroom space for supplementary education . However , by the 1990s the capacity was already insufficient for the growing congregation and for the range of projects based there . 
 Community tensions were again raised by an anti @-@ semitic Fascist march that took place in 1936 and was blocked by residents and activists at the Battle of Cable Street . From the mid @-@ 1970s anti @-@ Asian violence occurred , culminating in the murder on 4 May 1978 of a 25 @-@ year @-@ old clothing worker named Altab Ali by three white teenagers in a racially motivated attack . Bangladeshi groups mobilised for self @-@ defence , 7 @,@ 000 people marched to Hyde Park in protest , and the community became more politically involved . The former churchyard of St Mary 's Whitechapel , near where the attack took place , was renamed " Altab Ali Park " in 1998 as a commemoration of his death . Inter @-@ racial tension has continued with occasional outbreaks of violence and in 1993 there was a council seat win for the British National Party ( since lost ) . A 1999 bombing in Brick Lane was part of a series that targeted ethnic minorities , gays and " <unk> " . 
 = = = = Demographics = = = = 
 The population of the East End increased inexorably throughout the 19th century . House building could not keep pace and overcrowding was rife . It was not until the interwar period that there was a decline caused by migration to new London suburbs like the Becontree estate , built by the London County Council between 1921 and 1932 , and to areas outside London . This depopulation accelerated after the Second World War and has only recently begun to reverse . 
 These population figures reflect the area that now forms the London Borough of Tower Hamlets only : 
 By comparison , in 1801 the population of England and Wales was 9 million ; by 1851 it had more than doubled to 18 million , and by the end of the century had reached 40 million . Today , Bangladeshis form the largest minority population in Tower Hamlets , constituting 33 @.@ 5 % of the borough 's population at the 2001 census ; the Bangladeshi community there is the largest such community in Britain . The 2006 estimates show a decline in this group to 29 @.@ 8 % of the population , reflecting a movement to better economic circumstances and the larger houses available in the eastern suburbs . In this , the latest group of migrants are following a pattern established for over three centuries . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 The high levels of poverty in the East End have , throughout history , corresponded with a high incidence of crime . From earliest times , crime depended , as did labour , on the importing of goods to London , and their interception in transit . Theft occurred in the river , on the quayside and in transit to the City warehouses . This was why , in the 17th century , the East India Company built high @-@ walled docks at Blackwall and had them guarded to minimise the vulnerability of their cargoes . Armed convoys would then take the goods to the company 's secure compound in the City . The practice led to the creation of ever @-@ larger docks throughout the area , and large roads to drive through the crowded 19th century slums to carry goods from the docks . 
 No police force operated in London before the 1750s . Crime and disorder were dealt with by a system of magistrates and volunteer parish constables , with strictly limited jurisdiction . Salaried constables were introduced by 1792 , although they were few in number and their power and jurisdiction continued to derive from local magistrates , who in extremis could be backed by militias . In 1798 , England 's first Marine Police Force was formed by magistrate Patrick Colquhoun and a Master Mariner , John Harriott , to tackle theft and looting from ships anchored in the Pool of London and the lower reaches of the river . Its base was ( and remains ) in Wapping High Street . It is now known as the Marine Support Unit . 
 In 1829 , the Metropolitan Police Force was formed , with a remit to patrol within 7 miles ( 11 km ) of Charing Cross , with a force of 1 @,@ 000 men in 17 divisions , including ' H ' division , based in Stepney . Each division was controlled by a superintendent , under whom were four inspectors and sixteen sergeants . The regulations demanded that recruits should be under thirty @-@ five years of age , well built , at least 5 @-@ foot @-@ 7 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 70 m ) in height , literate and of good character . 
 Unlike the former constables , the police were recruited widely and financed by a levy on ratepayers ; so they were initially disliked . The force took until the mid @-@ 19th century to be established in the East End . Unusually , Joseph Sadler Thomas , a Metropolitan Police superintendent of ' F ' ( Covent Garden ) Division , appears to have mounted the first local investigation ( in Bethnal Green ) , in November 1830 of the London Burkers . A specific Dockyard division of the Metropolitan force was formed to assume responsibility for shore patrols within the docks in 1841 , a detective department was formed in 1842 , and in 1865 , ' J ' division was established in Bethnal Green . 
 One of the East End industries that serviced ships moored off the Pool of London was prostitution , and in the 17th century , this was centred on the Ratcliffe Highway , a long street lying on the high ground above the riverside settlements . In 1600 , it was described by the antiquarian John Stow as ' a continual street , or filthy straight passage , with alleys of small tenements or cottages builded , inhabited by sailors and <unk> . ' Crews were ' paid off ' at the end of a long voyage , and would spend their earnings on drink in the local taverns . 
 One madame described as ' the great bawd of the seamen ' by Samuel Pepys was Damaris Page . Born in Stepney in approximately 1610 , she had moved from prostitution to running brothels , including one on the Highway that catered for ordinary seaman and a further establishment nearby that catered for the more expensive tastes amongst the officers and gentry . She died wealthy , in 1669 , in a house on the Highway , despite charges being brought against her and time spent in Newgate Prison . 
 By the 19th century , an attitude of toleration had changed , and the social reformer William Acton described the riverside prostitutes as a ' horde of human <unk> who swarm the pestilent dens by the riverside at Ratcliffe and Shadwell ' . The ' Society for the Suppression of Vice ' estimated that between the Houndsditch , Whitechapel and Ratcliffe areas there were 1803 prostitutes ; and between Mile End , Shadwell and Blackwall 963 women in the trade . They were often victims of circumstance , there being no welfare state and a high mortality rate amongst the inhabitants that left wives and daughters destitute , with no other means of income . 
 At the same time , religious reformers began to introduce ' Seamans ' Missions ' throughout the dock areas that sought both to provide for seafarer 's physical needs and to keep them away from the temptations of drink and women . Eventually , the passage of the ' Contagious Diseases Act ' in 1864 allowed policemen to arrest prostitutes and detain them in hospital . The act was repealed in 1886 , after agitation by early feminists , such as Josephine Butler and Elizabeth Wolstenholme , led to the formation of the Ladies National Association for the Repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts . 
 Notable crimes in the area include the Ratcliff Highway murders ( 1813 ) ; the killings committed by the London Burkers ( apparently inspired by Burke and Hare ) in Bethnal Green ( 1831 ) ; the notorious serial killings of prostitutes by Jack the Ripper ( 1888 ) ; and the Siege of Sidney Street ( 1911 ) ( in which anarchists , inspired by the legendary Peter the Painter , took on Home Secretary Winston Churchill , and the army ) . 
 In the 1960s the East End was the area most associated with gangster activity , most notably that of the Kray twins . The 1996 Docklands bombing caused significant damage around South Quay Station , to the south of the main Canary Wharf development . Two people were killed and thirty @-@ nine injured in one of Mainland Britain 's biggest bomb attacks by the Provisional Irish Republican Army . This led to the introduction of police checkpoints controlling access to the Isle of Dogs , reminiscent of the City 's ' ring of steel ' . 
 = = = Disasters = = = 
 Many disasters have befallen the residents of the East End , both in war and in peace . In particular , as a maritime port , plague and pestilence have disproportionately fallen on the residents of the East End . The area most afflicted by the Great Plague ( 1665 ) was Spitalfields , and cholera epidemics broke out in Limehouse in 1832 and struck again in 1848 and 1854 . <unk> and tuberculosis were also common in the crowded 19th century tenements . The Princess Alice was a passenger steamer crowded with day trippers returning from Gravesend to Woolwich and London Bridge . On the evening of 3 September 1878 , she collided with the steam collier Bywell Castle ( named for Bywell Castle ) and sank into the Thames in under four minutes . Of the approximately 700 passengers , over 600 were lost . 
 During the First World War , the morning of 13 June 1917 was the first ever daylight air @-@ raid over the East End which in total killed 104 people . Sixteen of the dead were 5 and 6 year olds who were sitting in their class room at Upper North Street School , Poplar when the bomb hit . The memorial which still stands today in Poplar Recreation Ground was built by A.R. Adams , a local funeral director at the time . Also , on 19 January 1917 , 73 people died , including 14 workers , and more than 400 were injured , in a TNT explosion in the Brunner @-@ Mond munitions factory in Silvertown . Much of the area was flattened , and the shock wave was felt throughout the city and much of Essex . This was the largest explosion in London history , and was heard in Southampton and Norwich . Andreas Angel , chief chemist at the plant , was posthumously awarded the Edward Medal for trying to extinguish the fire that caused the blast . The same year , on 13 June , a bomb from a German Gotha bomber killed 18 children in their primary school in Upper North Street , Poplar . This event is commemorated by the local war memorial erected in Poplar Recreation Ground , but during the war a total of 120 children and 104 adults were killed in the East End by aerial bombing , with many more injured . 
 Another tragedy occurred on the morning of 16 May 1968 when Ronan Point , a 23 @-@ storey tower block in Newham , suffered a structural collapse due to a natural gas explosion . Four people were killed in the disaster and seventeen were injured , as an entire corner of the building slid away . The collapse caused major changes in UK building regulations and led to the decline of further building of high rise council flats that had characterised 1960s public architecture . 
 = = = Entertainment = = = 
 Inn @-@ yard theatres were first established in the Tudor period , with the Boar 's Head Inn ( 1557 ) in Whitechapel , the George in Stepney and a purpose built , but short lived , John <unk> 's Red Lion Theatre ( 1567 ) , nearby . The first permanent theatres with resident companies were constructed in Shoreditch , with James Burbage 's The Theatre ( 1576 ) and Henry Lanman 's Curtain Theatre ( 1577 ) standing close together . On the night of 28 December 1598 Burbage 's sons dismantled The Theatre , and moved it piece by piece across the Thames to construct the Globe Theatre . 
 The Goodman 's Fields Theatre was established in 1727 , and it was here that David Garrick made his successful début as Richard III , in 1741 . In the 19th century the theatres of the East End rivalled in their grandiosity and seating capacity those of the West End . The first of this era was the ill @-@ fated Brunswick Theatre ( 1828 ) , which collapsed three days after opening , killing 15 people . This was followed by the opening of the Pavilion ( 1828 ) in Whitechapel , the Garrick ( 1831 ) in Leman Street , the Effingham ( 1834 ) in Whitechapel , the Standard ( 1835 ) in Shoreditch , the City of London ( 1837 ) in Norton Folgate , then the Grecian and the Britannia Theatre in Hoxton ( 1840 ) . Though very popular for a time , from the 1860s onwards these theatres , one by one , began to close , the buildings were demolished and their very memory began to fade . 
 There were also many Yiddish theatres , particularly around Whitechapel . These developed into professional companies , after the arrival of Jacob Adler in 1884 and the formation of his ' Russian Jewish Operatic Company ' that first performed in Beaumont Hall , Stepney , and then found homes both in the Prescott Street Club , Stepney , and in Princelet Street in Spitalfields . The Pavilion became an exclusively Yiddish theatre in 1906 , finally closing in 1936 and being demolished in 1960 . Other important Jewish theatres were <unk> , The Jewish National Theatre and the Grand Palais . Performances were in Yiddish , and predominantly melodrama . These declined , as audience and actors left for New York and the more prosperous parts of London . 
 The once popular music halls of the East End have mostly met the same fate as the theatres . Prominent examples included the London Music Hall ( 1856 – 1935 ) , 95 @-@ 99 Shoreditch High Street , and the Royal Cambridge Music Hall ( 1864 – 1936 ) , 136 Commercial Street . An example of a ' giant pub hall ' , Wilton 's Music Hall ( 1858 ) , remains in Grace 's Alley , off Cable Street and the early ' saloon style ' Hoxton Hall ( 1863 ) survives in Hoxton Street , Hoxton . Many popular music hall stars came from the East End , including Marie Lloyd . 
 The music hall tradition of live entertainment lingers on in East End public houses , with music and singing . This is complemented by less respectable amusements such as striptease , which , since the 1950s has become a fixture of certain East End pubs , particularly in the area of Shoreditch , despite being a target of local authority restraints . 
 Novelist and social commentator Walter Besant proposed a ' Palace of Delight ' with concert halls , reading rooms , picture galleries , an art school and various classes , social rooms and frequent fêtes and dances . This coincided with a project by the philanthropist businessman , Edmund Hay Currie to use the money from the winding up of the ' Beaumont Trust ' , together with subscriptions to build a ' People 's Palace ' in the East End . Five acres of land were secured on the Mile End Road , and the Queen 's Hall was opened by Queen Victoria on 14 May 1887 . The complex was completed with a library , swimming pool , gymnasium and winter garden , by 1892 , providing an eclectic mix of populist entertainment and education . A peak of 8000 ' tickets ' were sold for classes in 1892 , and by 1900 , a Bachelor of Science degree awarded by the University of London was introduced . In 1931 , the building was destroyed by fire , but the Draper 's Company , major donors to the original scheme , invested more to rebuild the technical college and create Queen Mary 's College in December 1934 . A new ' People 's Palace ' was constructed , in 1937 , by the Metropolitan Borough of Stepney , in St Helen 's Terrace . This finally closed in 1954 . 
 Professional theatre returned briefly to the East End in 1972 , with the formation of the Half Moon Theatre in a rented former synagogue in Aldgate . In 1979 , they moved to a former Methodist chapel , near Stepney Green and built a new theatre on the site , opening in May 1985 , with a production of Sweeney Todd . The theatre enjoyed success , with premières by Dario Fo , Edward Bond and Steven Berkoff , but by the mid @-@ 1980s , the theatre suffered a financial crisis and closed . After years of disuse , it has been converted to a public house . The theatre spawned two further arts projects : the Half Moon Photography Workshop , exhibiting in the theatre and locally , and from 1976 publishing <unk> , and the ' Half Moon Young People 's Theatre ' , which remains active in Tower Hamlets . 
 The football team followed by many East End people is West Ham United , founded in 1895 as Thames Ironworks . The ' other ' East London clubs are Leyton Orient , and to a lesser extent Dagenham and Redbridge , but rather than rivalry , there is some overlap of support . Millwall F.C. originally played in the area of that name on the Isle of Dogs , but moved south of the Thames in 1910 . 
 = = = Late 20th and early 21st century = = = 
 Historically , the East End has suffered from under @-@ investment in both housing stock and infrastructure . From the 1950s , the East End represented the structural and social changes affecting the UK economy in a microcosm . The area had one of the highest concentrations of council housing , the legacy both of slum clearance and wartime destruction . The progressive closure of docks , cutbacks in railways and the closure and relocation of industry contributed to a long @-@ term decline , removing many of the traditional sources of low- and semi @-@ skilled jobs . However , beginning with the <unk> , in the 1980s , there have been a number of urban regeneration projects , most notably Canary Wharf , a huge commercial and housing development on the Isle of Dogs . Many of the 1960s tower blocks have been demolished or renovated , replaced by low @-@ rise housing , often in private ownership , or owned by housing associations . 
 The area around Old Spitalfields Market and Brick Lane called " London 's curry capital " has been extensively regenerated and , amongst other things , has been dubbed as Bangla Town . The contribution of Bangladeshi people to British life was recognised in 1998 , when Pola Uddin , Baroness Uddin of Bethnal Green became the first Bangladeshi @-@ born Briton to enter the House of Lords , and the first Muslim peer to swear her oath of allegiance in the name of her own faith . Her glory was short @-@ lived as she was investigated and suspended from the House of Lords for an expenses scandal where she was found guilty of offences . 
 The area is also home to a number of commercial and public art galleries ; including the newly expanded Whitechapel Gallery . The artists Gilbert and George have long made their home and workshop in Spitalfields , and the neighbourhood around Hoxton Square has become a centre for modern British art , including the White Cube gallery , with many artists from the Young British Artists movement living and working in the area . This has made the area around Hoxton and Shoreditch fashionable , with many former residents now driven out by higher property prices , and a busy nightlife has developed , with over 80 licensed premises around Shoreditch . 
 By the mid @-@ 1980s , both the District line ( extended to the East End in 1884 and 1902 ) and Central line ( 1946 ) were running beyond their capacity , and the Docklands Light Railway ( 1987 ) and Jubilee line ( 1999 ) were constructed to improve rail communications through the riverside district . There was a long @-@ standing plan to provide London with an inner motorway box , the East Cross Route . Apart from a short section , this was never built , but road communications were improved by the completion of the Limehouse Link tunnel under Limehouse Basin in 1993 and the extension of the A12 connecting to the Blackwall Tunnel with an upgraded carriageway in the 1990s . The extension of the East London line to the north , on the border between Islington and Hackney , provided further travel links in 2010 . From 2017 , Crossrail line 1 is expected to create a fast railway service across London , from east to west , with a major interchange at Whitechapel . New river crossings are planned at Beckton , ( the Thames Gateway Bridge ) and the proposed Silvertown Link road tunnel , to supplement the existing Blackwall Tunnel . 
 The 2012 Summer Olympics and Paralympics were held in an Olympic Park created on former industrial land around the River Lea . It is intended that this should leave a legacy of new sports facilities , housing , and industrial and technical infrastructure that will further help regenerate the area . This is linked to a new Stratford International station in the Newham , and the future Stratford City development . Also in Newham is London City Airport , built in 1986 in the former King George V Dock , a small airport serving short @-@ haul domestic and European destinations . In the same area , the University of East London has developed a new campus which will provide the United States Olympic Team its training base during the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games . The Queen Mary campus has expanded into new accommodation both adjacent to its existing site at Mile End , and with specialist medical campuses at the Royal London Hospital , Whitechapel and at Charterhouse Square in the City . Whitechapel is the base for the London Air Ambulance , and the hospital 's clinical facilities are undergoing a £ 1 billion refurbishment and expansion . 
 Much of the area remains , however , one of the poorest in Britain . This is in spite of rising property prices and the extensive building of luxury apartments centred largely around the former dock areas and alongside the Thames . With rising costs elsewhere in the capital and the availability of brownfield land , the East End has become a desirable place for business . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 The East End has been the subject of parliamentary commissions and other examinations of social conditions since the 19th century , as seen in Henry Mayhew 's London Labour and the London Poor ( 1851 ) and Charles Booth 's Life and Labour of the People in London ( third , expanded edition 1902 @-@ 3 , in 17 volumes ) . Narrative accounts of experiences amongst the East End poor were also written by Jack London in The People of the Abyss ( 1903 ) , by George Orwell in parts of his novel Down and Out in Paris and London , recounting his own experiences in the 1930s , as well as the Jewish writer Emanuel <unk> in his autobiographical novel Journey Through a Small Planet set in the 1930s . A further detailed study of Bethnal Green was carried out in the 1950s by sociologists Michael Young and Peter Willmott , in Family and Kinship in East London . 
 Themes from these social investigations have been drawn out in fiction . Crime , poverty , vice , sexual transgression , drugs , class @-@ conflict and multi @-@ cultural encounters and fantasies involving Jewish , Chinese and Indian immigrants are major themes . Though the area has been productive of local writing talent , from the time of Oscar Wilde 's The Picture of Dorian Gray ( 1891 ) the idea of ' slumming it ' in the ' forbidden ' East End has held a fascination for a coterie of the literati . 
 The image of the East Ender changed dramatically between the 19th century and the 20th . From the 1870s they were characterised in culture as often shiftless , untrustworthy and responsible for their own poverty . However , many East Enders worked in lowly but respectable occupations such as carters , porters and <unk> . This latter group particularly became the subject of music hall songs at the turn of the 20th century , with performers such as Marie Lloyd , Gus Elen and Albert Chevalier establishing the image of the humorous East End Cockney and highlighting the conditions of ordinary workers . This image , buoyed by close family and social links and the community 's fortitude in the war , came to be represented in literature and film . However , with the rise of the Kray twins in the 1960s the dark side of East End character returned with a new emphasis on criminality and gangsterism . 
 The success of Jennifer Worth 's memoir Call the Midwife ( 2002 , reissued 2007 ) , which became a major best @-@ seller and was adapted by the BBC into their most popular new programme since the current ratings system began , has led to a high level of interest in true @-@ life stories from the East End . Melanie McGrath 's Silvertown ( 2003 ) , about her grandmother 's life in the East End , was also a best @-@ seller , as was the follow @-@ up Hopping , about the annual East Enders ' ' holiday ' hop @-@ picking in Kent . A raft of similar books was published in the 2000s , among them Gilda O 'Neill 's best @-@ selling Our Street ( 2004 ) , Piers Dudgeon 's Our East End ( 2009 ) , Jackie Hyam 's <unk> and Lollipops ( 2011 ) and Grace Foakes ' Four Meals for <unk> ( reprinted 2011 ) . In 2012 , HarperCollins published The Sugar Girls , a book which tells the true stories of women working at Tate & Lyle 's factories in Silvertown since 1944 . The authors commented that many of the East Enders they interviewed were unhappy with the way their neighbourhoods had previously been portrayed in books and on screen – as squalid and criminal , in the Dickensian vein – and as a result they were keen to emphasise the positive aspects of East End life and community . 2012 also saw the publication of Spitalfields Life , a book adapted from the very successful blog of the same name , in which ' the gentle author ' ( who is anonymous ) writes about , and celebrates , the lives of the men and women who live and work in the East End community of Spitalfields . 
 = Starfish = 
 Starfish or sea stars are star @-@ shaped echinoderms belonging to the class Asteroidea . Common usage frequently finds these names being also applied to <unk> , which are correctly referred to as brittle stars or " basket stars " . About 1 @,@ 500 species of starfish occur on the seabed in all the world 's oceans , from the tropics to frigid polar waters . They are found from the intertidal zone down to abyssal depths , 6 @,@ 000 m ( 20 @,@ 000 ft ) below the surface . 
 Starfish are marine invertebrates . They typically have a central disc and five arms , though some species have a larger number of arms . The aboral or upper surface may be smooth , granular or spiny , and is covered with overlapping plates . Many species are brightly coloured in various shades of red or orange , while others are blue , grey or brown . Starfish have tube feet operated by a hydraulic system and a mouth at the centre of the oral or lower surface . They are opportunistic feeders and are mostly predators on benthic invertebrates . Several species have specialized feeding behaviours including eversion of their stomachs and suspension feeding . They have complex life cycles and can reproduce both sexually and asexually . Most can regenerate damaged parts or lost arms and they can shed arms as a means of defence . The Asteroidea occupy several significant ecological roles . Starfish , such as the ochre sea star ( Pisaster ochraceus ) and the reef sea star ( <unk> australis ) , have become widely known as examples of the keystone species concept in ecology . The tropical crown @-@ of @-@ thorns starfish ( <unk> <unk> ) is a voracious predator of coral throughout the Indo @-@ Pacific region , and the northern Pacific sea star is considered to be one of the world 's 100 worst invasive species . 
 The fossil record for starfish is ancient , dating back to the Ordovician around 450 million years ago , but it is rather poor , as starfish tend to disintegrate after death . Only the ossicles and spines of the animal are likely to be preserved , making remains hard to locate . With their appealing symmetrical shape , starfish have played a part in literature , legend , design and popular culture . They are sometimes collected as curios , used in design or as logos , and in some cultures , despite possible toxicity , they are eaten . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The scientific name Asteroidea was given to starfish by the French zoologist de Blainville in 1830 . It is derived from the Greek aster , ἀστήρ ( a star ) and the Greek eidos , εἶδος ( form , likeness , appearance ) . The class Asteroidea belongs to the phylum <unk> . As well as the starfish , the echinoderms include sea urchins , sand dollars , brittle and basket stars , sea cucumbers and crinoids . The larvae of echinoderms have bilateral symmetry , but during metamorphosis this is replaced with radial symmetry , typically pentameric . Adult echinoderms are characterized by having a water vascular system with external tube feet and a calcareous endoskeleton consisting of ossicles connected by a mesh of collagen fibres . Starfish are included in the subphylum <unk> , the characteristics of which include a flattened , star @-@ shaped body as adults consisting of a central disc and multiple radiating arms . The subphylum includes the two classes of Asteroidea , the starfish , and <unk> , the brittle stars and basket stars . Asteroids have broad @-@ based arms with skeletal support provided by calcareous plates in the body wall while <unk> have clearly demarcated slender arms strengthened by paired fused ossicles forming jointed " vertebrae " . 
 The starfish are a large and diverse class with about 1 @,@ 500 living species . There are seven extant orders , <unk> , Forcipulatida , <unk> , Paxillosida , Spinulosida , Valvatida and Velatida and two extinct ones , <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 Most starfish have five arms that radiate from a central disc , but the number varies with the group . Luidia ciliaris has seven arms , members of the <unk> have ten to fifteen while the Antarctic <unk> annulatus can have up to fifty . It is not unusual in species that typically have five arms for some individuals to possess six or more through abnormal development . 
 = = = Body wall = = = 
 The body wall consists of a thin cuticle , an epidermis consisting of a single layer of cells , a thick dermis formed of connective tissue and a thin coelomic myoepithelial layer , which provides the longitudinal and circular musculature . The dermis contains an endoskeleton of calcium carbonate components known as ossicles . These are honeycombed structures composed of calcite <unk> arranged in a lattice . They vary in form , with some bearing external granules , tubercles and spines , but most are tabular plates that fit neatly together in a tessellated manner and form the main covering of the aboral surface . Some are specialised structures such as the madreporite ( the entrance to the water vascular system ) , pedicellariae and paxillae . <unk> are compound ossicles with forceps @-@ like jaws . They remove debris from the body surface and wave around on flexible stalks in response to physical or chemical stimuli while continually making biting movements . They often form clusters surrounding spines . <unk> are umbrella @-@ like structures found on starfish that live buried in sediment . The edges of adjacent paxillae meet to form a false cuticle with a water cavity beneath in which the madreporite and delicate gill structures are protected . All the ossicles , including those projecting externally , are covered by the epidermal layer . 
 Several groups of starfish , including Valvatida and Forcipulatida , possess pedicellariae . In Forcipulatida , such as <unk> and Pisaster , they occur in <unk> @-@ like tufts at the base of each spine , whereas in the <unk> , such as <unk> <unk> , the pedicellariae are scattered over the body surface . Some are thought to assist in defence , while others aid in feeding or in the removal of organisms attempting to settle on the starfish 's surface . Some species like <unk> annulatus , <unk> californicus and <unk> <unk> use their large pedicellariae to capture small fish and crustaceans . 
 There may also be papulae , thin @-@ walled protrusions of the body cavity that reach through the body wall and extend into the surrounding water . These serve a respiratory function . The structures are supported by collagen fibres set at right angles to each other and arranged in a three @-@ dimensional web with the ossicles and papulae in the interstices . This arrangement enables both easy flexion of the arms by the starfish and the rapid onset of stiffness and rigidity required for actions performed under stress . 
 = = = Water vascular system = = = 
 The water vascular system of the starfish is a hydraulic system made up of a network of fluid @-@ filled canals and is concerned with locomotion , adhesion , food manipulation and gas exchange . Water enters the system through the madreporite , a porous , often conspicuous , sieve @-@ like <unk> on the aboral surface . It is linked through a stone canal , often lined with calcareous material , to a ring canal around the mouth opening . A set of radial canals leads off this ; one radial canal runs along the ambulacral groove in each arm . There are short lateral canals branching off alternately to either side of the radial canal , each ending in an ampulla . These bulb @-@ shaped organs are joined to tube feet ( <unk> ) on the exterior of the animal by short linking canals that pass through ossicles in the ambulacral groove . There are usually two rows of tube feet but in some species , the lateral canals are alternately long and short and there appear to be four rows . The interior of the whole canal system is lined with cilia . 
 When longitudinal muscles in the ampullae contract , valves in the lateral canals close and water is forced into the tube feet . These extend to contact the substrate . Although the tube feet resemble suction cups in appearance , the gripping action is a function of adhesive chemicals rather than suction . Other chemicals and relaxation of the ampullae allow for release from the substrate . The tube feet latch on to surfaces and move in a wave , with one arm section attaching to the surface as another releases . Some multi @-@ armed , fast @-@ moving starfish such as the sunflower <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) pull themselves along with some of their arms while letting others trail behind . Other starfish turn up the tips of their arms while moving which gives maximum exposure of the sensory tube feet and the eyespot to external stimuli . 
 Most starfish cannot move quickly , a typical speed being that of the leather star ( <unk> imbricata ) , which can manage just 15 cm ( 6 in ) in a minute . Some burrowing species from the genera Astropecten and Luidia have points rather than suckers on their long tube feet and are capable of much more rapid motion , " gliding " across the ocean floor . The sand star ( Luidia <unk> ) can travel at a speed of 2 @.@ 8 m ( 9 ft 2 in ) per minute . 
 Apart from their function in locomotion , the tube feet act as accessory gills . The water vascular system serves to transport oxygen from , and carbon dioxide to , the tube feet and also nutrients from the gut to the muscles involved in locomotion . Fluid movement is bidirectional and initiated by cilia . Gas exchange also takes place through other gills known as papulae , which are thin @-@ walled bulges on the aboral surface of the disc and arms . Oxygen is transferred from these to the coelomic fluid , which acts as the transport medium for gasses . Oxygen dissolved in the water is distributed through the body mainly by the fluid in the main body cavity ; the circulatory system may also play a minor role . 
 = = = Digestive system and excretion = = = 
 The gut of a starfish occupies most of the disc and extends into the arms . The mouth is located in the centre of the oral surface , where it is surrounded by a tough <unk> membrane and closed with a sphincter . The mouth opens through a short oesophagus into a stomach divided by a constriction into a larger , eversible cardiac portion and a smaller pyloric portion . The cardiac stomach is glandular and pouched , and is supported by ligaments attached to ossicles in the arms so it can be pulled back into position after it has been everted . The pyloric stomach has two extensions into each arm : the pyloric caeca . These are elongated , branched hollow tubes that are lined by a series of glands , which secrete digestive enzymes and absorb nutrients from the food . A short intestine and rectum run from the pyloric stomach to open at a small anus at the apex of the aboral surface of the disc . 
 Primitive starfish , such as Astropecten and Luidia , swallow their prey whole , and start to digest it in their cardiac stomachs . Shell valves and other inedible materials are ejected through their mouths . The semi @-@ digested fluid is passed into their pyloric stomachs and caeca where digestion continues and absorption ensues . In more advanced species of starfish , the cardiac stomach can be everted from the organism 's body to engulf and digest food . When the prey is a clam or other bivalve , the starfish pulls with its tube feet to separate the two valves slightly , and inserts a small section of its stomach , which releases enzymes to digest the prey . The stomach and the partially digested prey are later retracted into the disc . Here the food is passed on to the pyloric stomach , which always remains inside the disc . The retraction and contraction of the cardiac stomach is activated by a neuropeptide known as <unk> . 
 Because of this ability to digest food outside the body , starfish can hunt prey much larger than their mouths . Their diets include clams and oysters , arthropods , small fish and gastropod molluscs . Some starfish are not pure carnivores , supplementing their diets with algae or organic detritus . Some of these species are grazers , but others trap food particles from the water in sticky mucus strands that are swept towards the mouth along ciliated grooves . 
 The main nitrogenous waste product is ammonia . Starfish have no distinct excretory organs ; waste ammonia is removed by diffusion through the tube feet and papulae . The body fluid contains phagocytic cells , <unk> , which are also found within the hemal and water vascular systems . These cells engulf waste material , and eventually migrate to the tips of the papulae , where a portion of body wall is nipped off and ejected into the surrounding water . Some waste may also be excreted by the pyloric glands and voided with the faeces . 
 Starfish do not appear to have any mechanisms for osmoregulation , and keep their body fluids at the same salt concentration as the surrounding water . Although some species can tolerate relatively low salinity , the lack of an osmoregulation system probably explains why starfish are not found in fresh water or even in many estuarine environments . 
 = = = Sensory and nervous systems = = = 
 Although starfish do not have many well @-@ defined sense organs , they are sensitive to touch , light , temperature , orientation and the status of the water around them . The tube feet , spines and pedicellariae are sensitive to touch . The tube feet , especially those at the tips of the rays , are also sensitive to chemicals , enabling the starfish to detect odour sources such as food . There are eyespots at the ends of the arms , each one made of 80 – 200 simple ocelli . These are composed of pigmented epithelial cells that respond to light and are covered by a thick , transparent cuticle that both protects the ocelli and acts to focus light . Many starfish also possess individual photoreceptor cells in other parts of their bodies and respond to light even when their eyespots are covered . Whether they advance or retreat depends on the species . 
 While a starfish lacks a centralized brain , it has a complex nervous system with a nerve ring around the mouth and a radial nerve running along the ambulacral region of each arm parallel to the radial canal . The peripheral nerve system consists of two nerve nets : a sensory system in the epidermis and a motor system in the lining of the coelomic cavity . Neurons passing through the dermis connect the two . The ring nerves and radial nerves have sensory and motor components and coordinate the starfish 's balance and directional systems . The sensory component receives input from the sensory organs while the motor nerves control the tube feet and musculature . The starfish does not have the capacity to plan its actions . If one arm detects an attractive odour , it becomes dominant and temporarily over @-@ rides the other arms to initiate movement towards the prey . The mechanism for this is not fully understood . 
 = = = Circulatory system = = = 
 The body cavity contains the circulatory or <unk> system . The vessels form three rings : one around the mouth ( the <unk> <unk> ring ) , another around the digestive system ( the gastric ring ) and the third near the aboral surface ( the genital ring ) . The heart beats about six times a minute and is at the apex of a vertical channel ( the axial vessel ) that connects the three rings . At the base of each arm are paired gonads ; a lateral vessel extends from the genital ring past the gonads to the tip of the arm . This vessel has a blind end and there is no continuous circulation of the fluid within it . This liquid does not contain a pigment and has little or no respiratory function but is probably used to transport nutrients around the body . 
 = = = Secondary metabolites = = = 
 Starfish produce a large number of secondary metabolites in the form of lipids , including steroidal derivatives of cholesterol , and fatty acid amides of sphingosine . The steroids are mostly saponins , known as <unk> , and their <unk> derivatives . They vary between species and are typically formed from up to six sugar molecules ( usually glucose and galactose ) connected by up to three glycosidic chains . Long @-@ chain fatty acid amides of sphingosine occur frequently and some of them have known pharmacological activity . Various ceramides are also known from starfish and a small number of alkaloids have also been identified . The functions of these chemicals in the starfish have not been fully investigated but most have roles in defence and communication . Some are feeding deterrents used by the starfish to discourage predation . Others are <unk> and supplement the pedicellariae to prevent other organisms from settling on the starfish 's aboral surface . Some are alarm pheromones and escape @-@ eliciting chemicals , the release of which trigger responses in conspecific starfish but often produce escape responses in potential prey . Research into the efficacy of these compounds for possible pharmacological or industrial use occurs worldwide . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 = = = Sexual reproduction = = = 
 Most species of starfish are <unk> , there being separate male and female individuals . These are usually not distinguishable externally as the gonads cannot be seen , but their sex is apparent when they spawn . Some species are simultaneous hermaphrodites , producing eggs and sperm at the same time and in a few of these , the same gonad , called an <unk> , produces both eggs and sperm . Other starfish are sequential hermaphrodites . <unk> individuals of species like Asterina <unk> start life as males before changing sex into females as they grow older . In some species such as <unk> <unk> , a large female can split in half and the resulting offspring are males . When these grow large enough they change back into females . 
 Each starfish arm contains two gonads that release gametes through openings called gonoducts , located on the central disc between the arms . Fertilization is generally external but in a few species , internal fertilization takes place . In most species , the buoyant eggs and sperm are simply released into the water ( free spawning ) and the resulting embryos and larvae live as part of the plankton . In others , the eggs may be stuck to the undersides of rocks . In certain species of starfish , the females brood their eggs – either by simply enveloping them or by holding them in specialised structures . Brooding may be done in pockets on the starfish 's aboral surface , inside the pyloric stomach ( <unk> <unk> ) or even in the interior of the gonads themselves . Those starfish that brood their eggs by " sitting " on them usually assume a humped posture with their discs raised off the substrate . <unk> militaris broods a few of its young and disperses the remaining eggs , that are too numerous to fit into its pouch . In these brooding species , the eggs are relatively large , and supplied with yolk , and they generally develop directly into miniature starfish without an intervening larval stage . The developing young are called lecithotrophic because they obtain their nutrition from the yolk as opposed to " <unk> " larvae that feed in the water column . In <unk> <unk> , an <unk> <unk> , the young starfish obtain nutrients by eating other eggs and embryos in the brood pouch . Brooding is especially common in polar and deep @-@ sea species that live in environments unfavourable for larval development and in smaller species that produce just a few eggs . 
 In the tropics , a plentiful supply of phytoplankton is continuously available for starfish larvae to feed on . Spawning takes place at any time of year , each species having its own characteristic breeding season . In temperate regions , the spring and summer brings an increase in food supplies . The first individual of a species to spawn may release a pheromone that serves to attract other starfish to aggregate and to release their gametes synchronously . In other species , a male and female may come together and form a pair . This behaviour is called <unk> and the male climbs on top , placing his arms between those of the female . When she releases eggs into the water , he is induced to spawn . Starfish may use environmental signals to coordinate the time of spawning ( day length to indicate the correct time of the year , dawn or dusk to indicate the correct time of day ) , and chemical signals to indicate their readiness to breed . In some species , mature females produce chemicals to attract sperm in the sea water . 
 = = = Larval development = = = 
 Most starfish embryos hatch at the blastula stage . The original ball of cells develops a lateral pouch , the archenteron . The entrance to this is known as the blastopore and it will later develop into the anus . Another invagination of the surface will fuse with the tip of the archenteron as the mouth while the interior section will become the gut . At the same time , a band of cilia develops on the exterior . This enlarges and extends around the surface and eventually onto two developing arm @-@ like outgrowths . At this stage the larva is known as a bipinnaria . The cilia are used for locomotion and feeding , their rhythmic beat wafting phytoplankton towards the mouth . 
 The next stage in development is a brachiolaria larva and involves the growth of three short , additional arms . These are at the anterior end , surround a sucker and have adhesive cells at their tips . Both bipinnaria and brachiolaria larvae are bilaterally symmetrical . When fully developed , the brachiolaria settles on the seabed and attaches itself with a short stalk formed from the ventral arms and sucker . Metamorphosis now takes place with a radical rearrangement of tissues . The left side of the larval body becomes the oral surface of the juvenile and the right side the aboral surface . Part of the gut is retained but the mouth and anus move to new positions . Some of the body cavities degenerate but others become the water vascular system and the visceral coelom . The starfish is now <unk> symmetrical . It casts off its stalk and becomes a free @-@ living juvenile starfish about 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 04 in ) in diameter . Starfish of the order Paxillosida have no brachiolaria stage , with the bipinnaria larvae settling on the seabed and developing directly into juveniles . 
 = = = Asexual reproduction = = = 
 Some species of starfish are able to reproduce asexually as adults either by fission of their central discs or by autotomy of one or more of their arms . Which of these processes occurs depends on the genus . Among starfish that are able to regenerate their whole body from a single arm , some can do so even from fragments just 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) long . Single arms that regenerate a whole individual are called comet forms . The division of the starfish , either across its disc or at the base of the arm , is usually accompanied by a weakness in the structure that provides a fracture zone . 
 The larvae of several species of starfish can reproduce asexually before they reach maturity . They do this by <unk> some parts of their bodies or by budding . When such a larva senses that food is plentiful , it takes the path of asexual reproduction rather than normal development . Though this costs it time and energy and delays maturity , it allows a single larva to give rise to multiple adults when the conditions are appropriate . 
 = = = Regeneration = = = 
 Some species of starfish have the ability to regenerate lost arms and can regrow an entire new limb given time . A few can regrow a complete new disc from a single arm , while others need at least part of the central disc to be attached to the detached part . Regrowth can take several months or years , and starfish are vulnerable to infections during the early stages after the loss of an arm . A separated limb lives off stored nutrients until it regrows a disc and mouth and is able to feed again . Other than fragmentation carried out for the purpose of reproduction , the division of the body may happen inadvertently due to part being detached by a predator , or part may be actively shed by the starfish in an escape response . The loss of parts of the body is achieved by the rapid softening of a special type of connective tissue in response to nervous signals . This type of tissue is called catch connective tissue and is found in most echinoderms . An autotomy @-@ promoting factor has been identified which , when injected into another starfish , causes rapid shedding of arms . 
 = = = Lifespan = = = 
 The lifespan of a starfish varies considerably between species , generally being longer in larger forms and in those with planktonic larvae . For example , <unk> <unk> broods a small number of large @-@ <unk> eggs . It has an adult weight of 20 g ( 0 @.@ 7 oz ) , reaches sexual maturity in two years and lives for about ten years . Pisaster ochraceus releases a large number of eggs into the sea each year and has an adult weight of 80 g ( 2 @.@ 8 oz ) . It reaches maturity in five years and has a maximum recorded lifespan of 34 years . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Distribution and habitat = = = 
 Echinoderms , including starfish , maintain a delicate internal electrolyte balance that is in equilibrium with sea water . This means that it is only possible for them to live in a marine environment and they are not found in any freshwater habitats . Starfish species inhabit all of the world 's oceans . Habitats range from tropical coral reefs , rocky shores , tidal pools , mud , and sand to kelp forests , seagrass meadows and the deep @-@ sea floor down to at least 6 @,@ 000 m ( 20 @,@ 000 ft ) . The greatest diversity of species occurs in coastal areas . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Most species are generalist predators , eating microalgae , sponges , bivalves , snails and other small animals . Some species are detritivores , eating decomposing organic material and faecal matter . The crown @-@ of @-@ thorns starfish consumes coral polyps . The processes of feeding and capture may be aided by special parts ; Pisaster <unk> , the short @-@ spined <unk> from the West Coast of America , can use a set of specialized tube feet to dig itself deep into the soft substrate to extract prey ( usually clams ) . <unk> the shellfish , the starfish slowly pries open the prey 's shell by wearing out its adductor muscle , and then inserts its everted stomach into the crack to digest the soft tissues . The gap between the valves need only be a fraction of a millimetre wide for the stomach to gain entry . 
 = = = Ecological impact = = = 
 Starfish are keystone species in their respective marine communities . Their relatively large sizes , diverse diets and ability to adapt to different environments makes them ecologically important . The term " keystone species " was in fact first used by Robert Paine in 1966 to describe a starfish , Pisaster ochraceus . When studying the low intertidal coasts of Washington state , Paine found that predation by P. ochraceus was a major factor in the diversity of species . Experimental removals of this top predator from a stretch of shoreline resulted in lower species diversity and the eventual domination of Mytilus mussels , which were able to outcompete other organisms for space and resources . Similar results were found in a 1971 study of <unk> australis on the intertidal coast of the South Island of New Zealand . S. australis was found to have removed most of a batch of transplanted mussels within two or three months of their placement , while in an area from which S. australis had been removed , the mussels increased in number dramatically , overwhelming the area and threatening biodiversity . 
 The feeding activity of the omnivorous starfish <unk> reticulatus on sandy and seagrass bottoms in the Virgin Islands appears to regulate the diversity , distribution and abundance of microorganisms . These starfish engulf piles of sediment removing the surface films and algae adhering to the particles . Organisms that dislike this disturbance are replaced by others better able to rapidly recolonise " clean " sediment . In addition , foraging by these migratory starfish creates diverse patches of organic matter , which may play a role in the distribution and abundance of organisms such as fish , crabs and sea urchins that feed on the sediment . 
 Starfish sometimes have negative effects on ecosystems . Outbreaks of crown @-@ of @-@ thorns starfish have caused damage to coral reefs in Northeast Australia and French Polynesia . A study in Polynesia found that coral cover declined drastically with the arrival of migratory starfish in 2006 , dropping from 50 % to under 5 % in three years . This had an unintended effect on reef @-@ feeding fish and the whole benthic community . <unk> <unk> is one of a few echinoderm invasive species . Its larvae likely arrived in Tasmania from central Japan via water discharged from ships in the 1980s . The species has since grown in numbers to the point where they threaten commercially important bivalve populations . As such , they are considered pests , and are on the Invasive Species Specialist Group 's list of the world 's 100 worst invasive species . 
 = = = Threats = = = 
 Starfish may be preyed on by conspecifics , other starfish species , tritons , crabs , fish , gulls and sea otters . Their first lines of defence are the saponins present in their body walls , which have unpleasant flavours . Some starfish such as Astropecten <unk> also include powerful toxins such as tetrodotoxin among their chemical armoury , and the slime star can ooze out large quantities of repellent mucus . They also have body armour in the form of hard plates and spines . The crown @-@ of @-@ thorns starfish is particularly unattractive to potential predators , being heavily defended by sharp spines , laced with toxins and sometimes with bright warning colours . Other species protect their vulnerable tube feet and arm tips by lining their ambulacral grooves with spines and heavily plating their extremities . 
 Several species sometimes suffer from a wasting condition caused by bacteria in the genus Vibrio ; however , a more widespread wasting disease , causing mass mortalities among starfish , appears sporadically . A paper published in November 2014 revealed the most likely cause of this disease to be a <unk> the authors named sea star @-@ associated <unk> ( <unk> ) . The protozoan <unk> <unk> is known to infect the gonads of starfish and damage tissue . Starfish are vulnerable to high temperatures . Experiments have shown that the feeding and growth rates of P. ochraceus reduce greatly when their body temperatures rise above 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) and that they die when their temperature rises to 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) . This species has a unique ability to absorb seawater to keep itself cool when it is exposed to sunlight by a receding tide . It also appears to rely on its arms to absorb heat , so as to protect the central disc and vital organs like the stomach . 
 Starfish and other echinoderms are sensitive to marine pollution . The common starfish is considered to be a bioindicator for marine ecosystems . A 2009 study found that P. ochraceus is unlikely to be affected by ocean acidification as severely as other marine animals with calcareous skeletons . In other groups , structures made of calcium carbonate are vulnerable to dissolution when the pH is lowered . Researchers found that when P. ochraceus were exposed to 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) and 770 ppm carbon dioxide ( beyond rises expected in the next century ) , they were relatively unaffected . Their survival is likely due to the nodular nature of their skeletons , which are able to compensate for a shortage of carbonate by growing more fleshy tissue . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 Echinoderms first appeared in the fossil record in the Cambrian . The first known <unk> were the <unk> , which exhibit characteristics of both groups . Modern starfish and brittle stars probably had a common <unk> ancestor . Starfish are infrequently found as fossils , possibly because their hard skeletal components separate as the animal decays . However , although starfish fossils are uncommon , there are a few places where accumulations of complete skeletal structures occur , fossilized in place in Lagerstätten — so @-@ called " starfish beds " . 
 By the late Paleozoic , the crinoids and <unk> were the predominant echinoderms , and some limestones from this period are made almost entirely from fragments from these groups . In the two major extinction events that occurred during the late Devonian and late Permian , the <unk> were wiped out and only a few species of crinoids survived . Many starfish species also became extinct in these events , but afterwards the surviving few species diversified rapidly within about sixty million years during the Early Jurassic and the beginning of the Middle Jurassic . A 2012 study found that speciation in starfish can occur rapidly . During the last 6 @,@ 000 years , divergence in the larval development of <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> has taken place , the former adopting internal fertilization and brooding and the latter remaining a broadcast <unk> . 
 = = = Diversity = = = 
 Living asteroids , the <unk> , are morphologically distinct from their forerunners in the Paleozoic . The taxonomy of the group is relatively stable but there is ongoing debate about the status of the Paxillosida , and the deep @-@ water sea daisies , though clearly Asteroidea and currently included in Velatida , do not fit easily in any accepted lineage . Phylogenetic data suggests that they may be a sister group , the <unk> , to the <unk> , or that the Velatida themselves may be a sister group . 
 = = = = Living groups = = = = 
 <unk> ( 2 families , 17 genera , 111 species ) 
 Species in this order have a small , inflexible disc and 6 – 20 long , thin arms , which they use for suspension feeding . They have a single series of marginal plates , a fused ring of disc plates , a reduced number of aboral plates , crossed pedicellariae , and several series of long spines on the arms . They live almost exclusively in deep @-@ sea habitats , although a few live in shallow waters in the Antarctic . In some species , the tube feet have rounded tips and lack suckers . 
 Forcipulatida ( 6 families , 63 genera , 269 species ) 
 Species in this order have distinctive pedicellariae , consisting of a short stalk with three skeletal ossicles . They tend to have robust bodies and have tube feet with flat @-@ tipped suckers usually arranged in four rows . The order includes well @-@ known species from temperate regions , including the common starfish of North Atlantic coasts and rock pools , as well as cold @-@ water and abyssal species . 
 <unk> ( 1 family , 8 genera , 75 species ) 
 These starfish are deep @-@ sea dwelling and have particularly flexible arms . The inner dorso @-@ lateral surfaces of the arms contain characteristic longitudinal muscle bands . In some species , the tube feet lack suckers . 
 Paxillosida ( 7 families , 48 genera , 372 species ) 
 This is a primitive order and members do not extrude their stomach when feeding , lack an anus and have no suckers on their tube feet . <unk> are plentiful on their aboral surface and they possess marginal plates and paxillae . They mostly inhabit soft @-@ bottomed areas of sand or mud . There is no brachiolaria stage in their larval development . The comb starfish ( Astropecten <unk> ) is a member of this order . 
 Spinulosida ( 1 family , 8 genera , 121 species ) 
 Most species in this order lack pedicellariae and all have a delicate skeletal arrangement with small or no marginal plates on the disc and arms . They have numerous groups of short spines on the aboral surface . This group includes the red starfish <unk> <unk> . 
 Valvatida ( 16 families , 172 genera , 695 species ) 
 Most species in this order have five arms and two rows of tube feet with suckers . There are conspicuous marginal plates on the arms and disc . Some species have paxillae and in some , the main pedicellariae are clamp @-@ like and recessed into the skeletal plates . This group includes the cushion stars , the leather star and the sea daisies . 
 Velatida ( 4 families , 16 genera , 138 species ) 
 This order of starfish consists mostly of deep @-@ sea and other cold @-@ water starfish often with a global distribution . The shape is pentagonal or star @-@ shaped with five to fifteen arms . They mostly have poorly developed skeletons with papulae widely distributed on the aboral surface and often spiny pedicellariae . This group includes the slime star . 
 = = = = Extinct groups = = = = 
 Extinct groups within the Asteroidea include : 
 † <unk> , with the type genus <unk> from the Devonian periods and Carboniferous . 
 † <unk> , with the Triassic genus <unk> ( at least 2 species ) . 
 = = = Phylogeny = = = 
 The phylogeny of the Asteroidea has been difficult to resolve , with visible ( morphological ) features proving inadequate , and the question of whether traditional taxa are clades in doubt . The phylogeny proposed by Gale in 1987 is : 
 The phylogeny proposed by Blake in 1987 is : 
 Later work making use of molecular evidence , with or without the use of morphological evidence , had by 2000 failed to resolve the argument . In 2011 , on further molecular evidence , <unk> and colleagues noted that the phylogeny of the echinoderms " has proven difficult " , and that " the overall phylogeny of extant echinoderms remains sensitive to the choice of analytical methods " . They presented a phylogenetic tree for the living Asteroidea only ; using the traditional names of starfish orders where possible , and indicating " part of " otherwise , the phylogeny is shown below . The <unk> are split from the Velatida , and the old Spinulosida is broken up . 
 = = Human relations = = 
 = = = In research = = = 
 Starfish are deuterostomes , closely related , together with all other echinoderms , to chordates , and are used in reproductive and developmental studies . Female <unk> produce large numbers of oocytes that are easily isolated ; these can be stored in a pre @-@ meiosis phase and stimulated to complete division by the use of 1 @-@ <unk> . Starfish oocytes are well suited for this research as they are large and easy to handle , transparent , simple to maintain in sea water at room temperature , and they develop rapidly . Asterina <unk> , used as a model organism for this purpose , is resilient and easy to breed and maintain in the laboratory . 
 Another area of research is the ability of starfish to regenerate lost body parts . The stem cells of adult humans are incapable of much differentiation and understanding the regrowth , repair and cloning processes in starfish may have implications for human medicine . 
 Starfish also have an unusual ability to expel foreign objects from their bodies , which makes them difficult to tag for research tracking purposes . 
 = = = In legend and culture = = = 
 An aboriginal Australian fable retold by the Welsh school headmaster William Jenkyn Thomas ( 1870 – 1959 ) tells how some animals needed a canoe to cross the ocean . Whale had one but refused to lend it , so Starfish kept him busy , telling him stories and grooming him to remove parasites , while the others stole the canoe . When Whale realized the trick he beat Starfish ragged , which is how Starfish still is today . 
 In 1900 , the scholar Edward <unk> documented The Creation Song , which he describes as " an ancient prayer for the dedication of a high chief " of Hawaii . Among the " uncreated gods " described early in the song are the male <unk> ( " Creation " ) and the female <unk> , both born in the night , a coral insect , the earthworm , and the starfish . 
 Georg Eberhard Rumpf 's 1705 The Ambonese Curiosity Cabinet describes the tropical varieties of Stella Marina or Bintang Laut , " Sea Star " , in Latin and Malay respectively , known in the waters around Ambon . He writes that the Histoire des Antilles reports that when the sea stars " see thunder storms approaching , [ they ] grab hold of many small stones with their little legs , looking to ... hold themselves down as if with anchors " . 
 Starfish is the title of novels by Peter Watts and Jennie Orbell , and in 2012 , Alice Addison wrote a non @-@ fiction book subtitled " A year in the life of bereavement and depression " . The Starfish and the Spider is a 2006 business management book by Ori Brafman and Rod <unk> ; its title alludes to the ability of the starfish to regenerate itself because of its decentralized nervous system , and the book suggests ways that a decentralized organisation may flourish . 
 In the Nickelodeon animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants , the eponymous character 's best friend is a dim @-@ witted starfish , Patrick Star . 
 = = = As food = = = 
 Starfish are widespread in the oceans , but are only occasionally used as food . There may be good reason for this : the bodies of numerous species are dominated by bony ossicles , and the body wall of many species contains saponins , which have an unpleasant taste , and others contain <unk> which are poisonous . Some species that prey on bivalve molluscs can transmit paralytic shellfish poisoning . Georg Eberhard Rumpf found few starfish being used for food in the Indonesian archipelago , other than as bait in fish traps , but on the island of " <unk> " [ sic ] the people cut them up , squeeze out the " black blood " and cook them with sour tamarind leaves ; after resting the pieces for a day or two , they remove the outer skin and cook them in coconut milk . Starfish are sometimes eaten in China , Japan and in Micronesia . 
 = = = As collectables = = = 
 Starfish are in some cases taken from their habitat and sold to tourists as souvenirs , ornaments , curios or for display in aquariums . In particular , <unk> reticulatus , with its easily accessed habitat and conspicuous coloration , is widely collected in the Caribbean . In the early to mid 20th century , this species was common along the coasts of the West Indies , but collection and trade have severely reduced its numbers . In the State of Florida , O. reticulatus is listed as endangered and its collection is illegal . Nevertheless , it is still sold throughout its range and beyond . A similar phenomenon exists in the Indo @-@ Pacific for species such as <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = In industry and military history = = = 
 With its multiple arms , the starfish provides a popular metaphor for computer networks , companies and software tools . It is also the name of a seabed imaging system and company . 
 Starfish has repeatedly been chosen as a name in military history . Three ships of the Royal Navy have borne the name HMS Starfish : an A @-@ class destroyer launched in 1894 ; an R @-@ class destroyer launched in 1916 ; and an S @-@ class submarine launched in 1933 and lost in 1940 . In the World War II , Starfish sites were large @-@ scale night @-@ time decoys created during The Blitz to simulate burning British cities . Starfish Prime was a high @-@ altitude nuclear test conducted by the United States on 9 July 1962 . 
 = Emirates Stadium = 
 The Emirates Stadium ( known as Ashburton Grove prior to sponsorship ) is a football stadium in Holloway , London , England , and the home of Arsenal Football Club . With a capacity of 60 @,@ 260 , the Emirates is the third @-@ largest football stadium in England after Wembley and Old Trafford . 
 In 1997 , Arsenal explored the possibility of relocating to a new stadium , having been denied planning permission by Islington Council to expand its home ground of Highbury . After considering various options ( including purchasing Wembley Stadium ) , the club bought an industrial and waste disposal estate in Ashburton Grove in 2000 . A year later they won the council 's approval to build a stadium on the site ; manager Arsène Wenger described this as the " biggest decision in Arsenal 's history " since the board appointed Herbert Chapman . Relocation began in 2002 , but financial difficulties delayed work until February 2004 . Emirates Airline was later announced as the main sponsor for the stadium . The whole stadium project was completed in 2006 at a cost of £ 390 million . The related Highbury Square development was completed in 2009 for an additional £ 130 million . 
 The stadium has undergone a process of " Arsenalisation " since 2009 with the aim of restoring Arsenal 's heritage and history . The ground has hosted international fixtures and music concerts . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 In response to the Hillsborough disaster of April 1989 , an inquiry led by Lord Taylor of Gosforth was launched into crowd safety at sports grounds . <unk> in January 1990 , the Taylor Report recommended the capacity restriction of grounds by 15 % with all terraces replaced by seating . Many football clubs , faced with the requirement of making their grounds all @-@ seater by the start of the 1994 – 95 season , had sought ways of raising income for converting terraced areas . Arsenal at the end of the 1990 – 91 season introduced a bond scheme , which offered supporters the right to buy a season ticket at its converted North Bank stand of Highbury . The board felt this was the only viable option after considering other proposals ; they did not want to compromise on their traditions , nor limit manager George Graham 's resources . At a price of between £ 1 @,@ 000 to £ 1 @,@ 500 , the 150 @-@ year bond was criticised by supporters , who argued it potentially blocked the participation of those less well @-@ off from supporting Arsenal . A campaign directed by the Independent Arsenal Supporters ' Association brought relative success as only a third of all bonds were sold . 
 The North Bank was the last area of Highbury to be refurbished . It opened in August 1993 at a cost of £ 20 million . The rework significantly reduced the stadium 's capacity , from 57 @,@ 000 at the beginning of the decade to under 40 @,@ 000 . High ticket prices to serve the club 's existing debts and low attendance figures forced Arsenal to explore the possibility of building a larger stadium in 1997 . The club wanted to attract an <unk> fanbase and financially compete with the biggest clubs in England . Manchester United by comparison enjoyed a rise in gate receipts from £ 43 @.@ 9 million in 1994 to £ 87 @.@ 9 million in 1997 , because of Old Trafford 's expansion . 
 Arsenal 's initial proposal to rebuild Highbury was met with disapproval from local residents , as it required the demolition of 25 neighbouring houses . It soon became problematic once the East Stand of the stadium was granted Grade II listing in July 1997 . After much consultation , the club eventually abandoned its plan , deciding a capacity of 48 @,@ 000 was not big enough . 
 In January 1998 , Arsenal investigated the opportunity of relocating to Wembley Stadium and made an official bid to buy the ground two months later . However , the Football Association and the English National Stadium Trust opposed Arsenal 's offer , stating that it would harm England 's bid for the 2006 FIFA World Cup , though FIFA denied this . By the end of the 1997 – 98 season , the bid was withdrawn and Wembley was purchased by The Football Association . The stadium , however , played host to all of Arsenal 's UEFA Champions League home ties during the 1998 – 99 and 1999 – 2000 seasons . Although the club fared poorly in the competition – eliminated twice from the group stages in successive seasons – Arsenal 's record home attendance ( 73 @,@ 707 against RC Lens in November 1998 ) was set and earned up to £ 1 million for each Wembley matchday , highlighting potential profitability . 
 = = = Site chosen and conflict = = = 
 Through the persuasion of estate agent and club property adviser Antony Spencer , Arsenal examined the feasibility of building a new stadium in Ashburton Grove in November 1999 . The land , 500 yards ( 460 m ) from Highbury , composed of a rubbish processing plant and industrial estate , 80 % owned by the Islington Council , Railtrack and Sainsbury 's . The move therefore depended on the club buying out the existing occupants and financing for their relocation . After passing the first significant milestone at the council 's planning committee , Arsenal submitted their planning application for a new 60 @,@ 000 seater stadium in November 2000 . This included a redevelopment project at Drayton Park , converting the existing ground Highbury as flats and building a new waste station in Lough Road . The scheme also involved the club creating 1 @,@ 800 new jobs for the community and 2 @,@ 300 new homes . Improvements to three railway stations , Holloway Road , Drayton Park and Finsbury Park , were promised in order to cope with the matchday crowds . 
 The move to Ashburton Grove was opposed by members of the Arsenal Independent Supporters ' Association ( <unk> ) , who were concerned about environmental issues . The Islington Stadium Communities Alliance ( ISCA ) ; an alliance of 16 groups representing local residents and businesses was set up in January 2000 to promote awareness against the redevelopment . Alison Carmichael , a spokeswoman for the group said of the move : " It may look like Arsenal are doing great things for the area , but in its detail the plan is awful . We blame the council ; the football club just wants to expand to make more money . " Seven months after the planning application was submitted in June 2001 , a poll showed that 75 % of respondents were against the scheme , with 2 @,@ 133 residents objecting and 712 in support . By October 2001 , the club asserted that a poll of Islington residents found that 70 % were in favour , and received the backing from Mayor of London , Ken Livingstone . 
 To push for more local support , the club planted the slogan " Let Arsenal support Islington " around Highbury during matches against Aston Villa and Juventus in December 2001 . It also featured as a backdrop for manager Arsène Wenger 's press conference in the lead up to Christmas . Islington Council approved Arsenal 's plans on 10 December 2001 , as 34 councillors voted in favour of the Ashburton Grove development with seven against and one abstention . 31 voted for the transfer of a waste recycling plant in Lough Road and eight against . The final vote was ratified by Ken Livingstone and Transport Secretary Stephen Byers . Arsenal was given the all clear to start work in July 2002 after a High Court judge rejected a challenge by local residents and ISCA . The club succeeded in a further legal challenge by small firms in January 2005 as the High Court upheld a decision by Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott to grant a compulsory purchase order in support of the scheme . 
 The stadium became a major issue in the local elections in May 2006 . The Metropolitan Police demanded that supporters ' coaches be parked in the nearby Sobel Sports Centre rather than in the underground car park , and restrictions on access to 14 streets be imposed on match days . The health and safety certificate would not be issued unless the stadium meets such conditions , without which the stadium could not open . The road closures were passed at a council meeting , but kept under review . 
 = = = Finance and naming = = = 
 Financing for the project proved difficult as Arsenal was not granted any public subsidy by the government . The club therefore sought other ways to generate income , namely by adopting a policy of buying football players for low transfer fees and selling high , as well as agreeing sponsorship deals . Arsenal recouped over £ 50 million from transfers involving Nicolas Anelka to Real Madrid and Marc Overmars , in a joint deal with Emmanuel Petit to Barcelona . The transfer of Anelka in particular helped fund the club 's new training ground , in London Colney , which opened in October 1999 . 
 In September 2000 , Granada Media Group purchased a five @-@ percent stake in Arsenal at a price of £ 47 million . As part of the acquisition , Granada became the premier media agent for the football club , handling advertising , sponsorship , merchandising , publishing and licensing agreements . The company furthermore invested £ 20 million in a joint venture , AFC Broadband , to exploit the club 's internet viewership . Arsenal chairman Peter Hill @-@ Wood said of the deal : " This partnership will assist us in meeting Arsenal 's two strategic objectives . First , to build a world @-@ class team and a new stadium with an increased capacity so that more of our fans can enjoy watching the team . Secondly , to develop the Arsenal brand on a global basis by extending our fanbase around the world . " Managing Director Keith Edelman added that the investment would be used directly to fund for the new stadium . The collapse of ITV Digital – part @-@ owned by Granada – in April 2002 coincided with company being tied in to pay £ 30 million once arrangements for the new stadium were finalised . 
 After announcing pre @-@ tax loss of £ <unk> for the financial year 2001 – 02 , the club formulated plans to reduce their wage bills in order to continue with the stadium work . Investment bank NM Rothschild and Sons was appointed to examine the financial situation at the club and advise whether it was feasible for Arsenal to move on with construction at the end of March 2003 . Although Arsenal secured a £ 260 million loan from a group of banks led by the Royal Bank of Scotland in April 2003 , the club suspended work on Ashburton Grove citing in a statement , " We have experienced a number of delays in arrangements for our new stadium project in recent months across a range of issues . The impact of these delays is that we will now be unable to deliver a stadium opening for the start of the 2005 – 06 season . " The cost of building the stadium , forecasted at £ 400 million , had risen by a £ 100 million during that period . To combat the financial difficulties , Arsenal throughout the summer of 2003 gave fans the opportunity to register their interest in a relaunched bond scheme . The club planned to issue 3 @,@ 000 bonds for between £ 3 @,@ 500 and £ 5 @,@ 000 each for a season ticket at Highbury , then at Ashburton Grove . Arsenal supporters reacted with surprise to the reintroduction of the bond scheme with <unk> chairman Steven Powell adding : " We are disappointed that the club has not consulted supporters before announcing a new bond scheme . " Though they never stated how many bonds were sold , Arsenal did raise several million pounds through the scheme . 
 Sportswear provider Nike signed a contract extension with Arsenal in August 2003 to remain as the club 's official kit supplier . This was presented as a solution to the stadium financing ; in addition to paying £ 55 million over seven years , Nike paid a minimum of £ 1 million each year as a royalty fee , dependent on sales . On 23 February 2004 , Arsenal Holdings plc – the club 's parent company announced that funding for the stadium was now secured with construction work being able to resume . Wenger said of the announcement : " It has been a big target of mine to participate in pushing the club forward and relocating to a new stadium is a necessity as it will enable us to become of one the biggest clubs in the world . " Interest on the £ 260 million debt was set at a commercial fixed rate over a 14 @-@ year period . To refinance the cost , the club planned to convert the money into a 30 @-@ year bond financed by banks . The proposed bond issue went ahead on 13 July 2006 . Arsenal issued £ 210 million worth of 13 @.@ 5 @-@ year bonds with a spread of 52 basis points over government bonds and £ 50 million of 7 @.@ 1 @-@ year bonds with a spread of 22 basis points over LIBOR . It was the first publicly marketed , asset @-@ backed bond issue by a European football club . The effective interest rate on these bonds is 5 @.@ 14 % and 5 @.@ 97 % , respectively , and are due to be paid back over a 25 @-@ year period ; the move to bonds has reduced the club 's annual debt service cost to approximately £ 20 million a year . In September 2010 , Arsenal announced that the Highbury Square development – one of the main sources of income to reduce the stadium debt – was now debt free and making revenue . 
 On 5 October 2004 , Emirates Airline signed a 15 @-@ year contract with Arsenal estimated at £ 100 million . Under the deal , the group secured naming rights to the stadium and shirt sponsorship when the club 's deal with O2 expired at the end of the 2005 – 06 season . The stadium name is often colloquially shortened from " Emirates Stadium " to " The Emirates " , although some supporters continue to use the former name " Ashburton Grove " or even " The Grove " for the new stadium , especially those who object to the concept of corporate sponsorship of stadium names . Due to UEFA regulations on stadium sponsors , during European matches the stadium is not officially referred to as Emirates Stadium , as Emirates are not an official sponsor of the Champions League competition ; other stadia , such as the Allianz Arena in Munich , have fallen foul of this rule before . UEFA refer to the stadium as Arsenal Stadium , which was the official name of the stadium at Highbury . 
 In November 2012 , Arsenal and Emirates officially announced a new deal worth £ 150 million at the Emirates Stadium . The partnership keeps Emirates as the official match and training shirt sponsor for another 5 years . The deal also grants Emirates the Ashburton Grove stadium naming rights until 2028 . The deals payment terms were brought forward for potential earlier investment though the extent of this was not released . 
 = = = Construction and opening = = = 
 Actual construction of the stadium began in February 2004 . Arsenal appointed Sir Robert McAlpine in January 2002 to carry out building work and the stadium was designed by HOK Sport ( known as Populous since 2009 ) , who were the architects for Stadium Australia and the redevelopment of Ascot Racecourse . Construction consultants <unk> and engineering firm Buro Happold were also involved in the process . 
 The first phase of demolition was completed in March 2004 and two months later stand piling on the West , East and North stands had been concluded . Two bridges over the Northern City railway line connecting the stadium with Drayton Park were also built ; these were completed in August 2004 . The stadium topped out in August 2005 and external glazing , power and water tank installation was completed by December 2005 . The first seat in the new stadium was ceremonially installed on 13 March 2006 by Arsenal midfielder Abou Diaby . Like Highbury , DD GrassMaster was selected as the pitch installer with Hewitt <unk> contracted to design and construct the playing field . Floodlights were successfully tested for the first time on 25 June 2006 , and a day later the goalposts were erected . 
 In order to obtain the licences the stadium needed to open , the stadium hosted three non @-@ full capacity events . The first ' ramp @-@ up ' event was a shareholder open day on 18 July 2006 , the second an open training session for 20 @,@ 000 selected club members held two days later . The third event on 22 July 2006 was striker Dennis Bergkamp 's testimonial match against Ajax . 
 The Emirates Stadium was officially opened by Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh on 26 October 2006 ; it had been intended that Queen Elizabeth II would open the stadium as well , but she suffered a back injury and was unable to attend on the day . Prince Philip quipped with the crowd : " Well , you may not have my wife , but you 've got the second @-@ most experienced plaque <unk> in the world . " The royal visit echoed the attendance of the Queen 's uncle , the Prince of Wales ( later King Edward VIII ) at the official opening of Highbury 's West Stand in 1932 . As a result of the change of plan , Queen Elizabeth extended to the club the honour of inviting the chairman , manager and first team to join her for afternoon tea at Buckingham Palace on 15 February 2007 – the first club to be invited to the palace for such an event . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Emirates Stadium is seen by many as the benchmark for top league stadia developments in the UK and Europe . Its design is a radical break from the traditions of the " English style " stadia of the United Kingdom and the Municipal multi @-@ tenant stadia of Europe . The focus on spectator experience for both general spectator and the Corporate or Premium Hospitality spectators marked a step change in stadia design and consequently on the football business in the UK , with Arsenal increasing their matchday revenues by 111 % . The architect , Christopher Lee of Populous , described the design as beautiful and intimidating . 
 The Emirates Stadium is a three @-@ tiered bowl with translucent polycarbonate roofing over the stands but not over the pitch . The underside is clad with metallic panels and the roof is supported by four triangular trusses , made of welded tubular steel . Two trusses span 200 metres ( 660 ft ) in a north – south direction while a further two span an east – west direction . The trusses are supported by the stadium 's vertical concrete cores , eight of which connected to them by steel tripods . They in turn each house four stairways , a passenger lift as well as service access . Façades are either glazed or woven between the cores which allows visitors on the podium to see inside the stadium . The glass and steel construction was devised by Populous to give an impression that the stadium sparkles in sunlight and glows in the night . 
 The upper ( 26 @,@ 646 ) and lower ( 24 @,@ 425 ) parts of the stadium feature standard seating . The stadium has two levels below ground that house its support facilities such as commercial kitchens , changing rooms and press and education centres . The main middle tier , known as the " Club Level " , is premium priced and also includes the director 's box . There are 7 @,@ 139 seats at this level , which are sold on licences lasting from one to four years . Immediately above the club tier there is a small circle consisting of 150 boxes of 10 , 12 and 15 seats . The total number of spectators at this level is 2 @,@ 222 . The high demand for tickets , as well as the relative wealth of their London fans , means revenue from premium seating and corporate boxes is nearly as high as the revenue from the entire stadium at Highbury . 
 The upper tier is contoured to leave open space in the corners of the ground , and the roof is significantly canted inwards . Both of these features are meant to provide as much airflow and sunlight to the pitch as possible . The stadium also gives an illusion that supporters in the upper tier on one side of the ground are unable to see supporters in the upper tier opposite . As part of a deal with Sony , the stadium was the first in the world to incorporate HDTV streaming . In the north @-@ west and south @-@ east corners of the stadium are two giant screens suspended from the roof . 
 The pitch is 105 by 68 metres ( 115 by 74 yd ) in size and the total grass area at Emirates is 113 by 76 metres ( 124 by 83 yd ) . Like Highbury , it runs north – south , with the players ' tunnel and the dugouts on the west side of the pitch underneath the main TV camera . The away fans are found in the south @-@ east corner of the lower tier . The away supporter configuration can be expanded from 1 @,@ 500 seats to 4 @,@ 500 seats behind the south goal in the lower tier , and a further 4 @,@ 500 seats can be made available also in the upper tier , bringing the total to 9 @,@ 000 supporters ( the regulation 15 % required for domestic cup competitions such as the FA Cup and League Cup ) . 
 The Emirates Stadium pays tribute to Arsenal 's former home , Highbury . The club 's offices are officially called Highbury House , located north @-@ east of Emirates Stadium , and house the bust of Herbert Chapman that used to reside at Highbury . Three other busts that used to reside at Highbury of Claude Ferrier ( architect of Highbury 's East stand ) , Denis Hill @-@ Wood ( former Arsenal chairman ) and manager Arsène Wenger have also been moved to Emirates Stadium and are in display in the entrance of the Diamond Club . Additionally , the two bridges over the railway line to the east of the stadium , connecting the stadium to Drayton Park , are called the Clock End and North Bank bridges , after the stands at Highbury ; the clock that gave its name to the old Clock End has been resited on the new clock end which features a newer , larger replica of the clock . The Arsenal club museum , which was formerly held in the North Bank Stand , opened in October 2006 and is located to the north of the stadium , within the Northern Triangle building . It houses the marble statues that were once held in the marble halls of Highbury . 
 = = = Arsenalisation = = = 
 In August 2009 , Arsenal began a programme of " Arsenalisation " of the Emirates Stadium after listening to feedback from supporters in a forum . The intention was to turn the stadium into a " visible stronghold of all things Arsenal through a variety of artistic and creative means " , led by club CEO Ivan Gazidis . 
 Among the first changes were white seats installed in the pattern of the club 's trademark cannon , located in the lower level stands opposite the entrance tunnel . " The Spirit of Highbury " – a shrine depicting every player to have played for Arsenal during its 93 @-@ year residence – was erected in late 2009 outside the stadium at the south end . Eight large murals on the exterior of the stadium were installed , each depicting four Arsenal legends linking arms , such that the effect of the completed design is 32 legends in a huddle embracing the stadium : 
 Around the lower concourse of the stadium , further murals depicting 12 " greatest moments " in Arsenal history voted for by a poll on the club 's website . Prior to the start of the 2010 – 11 season , Arsenal renamed the coloured seating quadrants of the ground as the East Stand , West Stand , North Bank , and Clock End . Akin to Highbury , this involved the installation of a clock above the newly renamed Clock End which was unveiled in a league match against Blackpool . 
 In April 2011 , Arsenal renamed two bridges near the stadium in honour of club directors Ken Friar and Danny <unk> . As part of the club 's 125 anniversary celebrations in December 2011 , Arsenal unveiled three statues of former captain Tony Adams , record goalscorer Thierry Henry and manager Herbert Chapman outside of the stadium . In February 2014 , before Arsenal 's match with Sunderland , the club unveiled a statue of former striker Dennis Bergkamp , outside the west stand of Emirates Stadium . 
 Banners and flags , often designed by supporters group <unk> , are hung around the ground . A large " 49 " flag , representing the run of 49 unbeaten league games , is passed around the lower tier before kick off . 
 = = = Expansion and future developments = = = 
 As of 2008 , Arsenal 's season ticket waiting list stood at 40 @,@ 000 people . The potential for expanding the stadium is a common topic within fan debate . Potential expansion methods include , make seats smaller , filling in the dips in the corners of the stadium though this would block airflow , and replacing the roof with a third level and building a new roof . There has also been discussion on the implementation of safe standing . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 As well as functioning as a football stadium , the Emirates Stadium also operates as a conference centre and music venue . On 27 March 2008 , the Emirates Stadium played host to a summit between British Prime Minister Gordon Brown and French President Nicolas Sarkozy , in part because the stadium was regarded as " a shining example of Anglo – French co @-@ operation " . When used as a music venue , the capacity can be up to 72 @,@ 000 as opposed to 60 @,@ 000 the capacity for domestic football matches . Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band became the first band to play a concert at the stadium on 30 May 2008 . They played a second gig the following night . British band Coldplay played three concerts at the Emirates in the June 2012 , having sold out the first two dates within 30 minutes of going on sale . They were the first band to sell out the stadium for music purposes . A full list of the concerts played so far at the stadium can be seen at the side . The June 2013 Green Day concert broke the record attendance at the stadium . 
 = = = International football matches = = = 
 The stadium has also been used for a number of international friendly matches all of which have featured the Brazil national football team . The first match was against Argentina on 3 September 2006 which ended in a 3 – 0 victory for Brazil . 
 = = Records = = 
 It is difficult to get accurate attendance figures as Arsenal do not release these , but choose to use tickets sold . The highest attendance for an Arsenal match at Emirates Stadium as of 2012 is 60 @,@ 161 , for a 2 – 2 draw with Manchester United on 3 November 2007 . The average attendance for competitive first @-@ team fixtures in the stadium 's first season , 2006 – 07 , was 59 @,@ 837 , with a Premier League average attendance of 60 @,@ 045 . The Record for the most away fans that have attended the Emirates Stadium was 9 @,@ 000 , set by Plymouth Argyle , where Arsenal won 3 – 1 in the FA Cup 3rd round in 2009 . The lowest attendance for an Arsenal match at Emirates Stadium as of 2012 is 46 @,@ 539 against Shrewsbury Town in the Football League Cup third round on 20 September 2011 , where Arsenal won 3 – 1 . The first player to score in a league game at the Emirates Stadium was Aston Villa 's Olof Mellberg after 53 minutes . The first Arsenal player to score at the Emirates Stadium was midfielder Gilberto Silva . 
 = = Transport and access = = 
 The Emirates Stadium is served by a number of London Underground stations and bus routes . Arsenal tube station is the closest for the northern portion of the stadium , with Highbury & Islington tube station servicing the southern end . While Holloway Road tube station is the closest to the southern portion , it is entry @-@ only before matches and exit @-@ only afterwards to prevent overcrowding . Drayton Park station , adjacent to the Clock End Bridge is shut on matchdays as the rail services to this station do not operate at weekends nor after 10 pm . £ 7 @.@ 6 million was set aside in the planning permission for upgrading Drayton Park and Holloway Road ; however Transport for London decided not to upgrade either station , in favour of improvement works at the interchanges at Highbury & Islington and Finsbury Park , both of which are served by Underground and First Capital Connect services and are approximately a ten @-@ minute walk away . The Emirates Stadium is the only football stadium that stands beside the East Coast Main Line between London and Edinburgh and is just over 2 miles from London King 's Cross . 
 Driving to the Emirates Stadium is strongly discouraged as there are strict matchday parking restrictions in operation around the stadium . An hour before kick @-@ off to one hour after the final whistle there is a complete ban on vehicle movement on a number of the surrounding roads , except for Islington residents and businesses with a road closure access permit . The parking restrictions mean that the stadium is highly dependent on the Underground service , particularly when there is no overground service in operation . Industrial action on a matchday in December 2012 forced Arsenal to reschedule the match for the following month . 
 The stadium opens to ticket holders two hours before kick @-@ off . The main club shop , named ' The Armoury ' , and ticket offices are located near the West Stand , with other an additional store at the base of the North Bank Bridge , named ' All Arsenal ' and the ' Arsenal Store ' next to Finsbury Park station . Arsenal operates an electronic ticketing system where members of ' The Arsenal ' ( the club 's fan membership scheme ) use their membership cards to enter the stadium , thus removing the need for turnstile operators . Non @-@ members are issued with one @-@ off paper tickets embedded with an RFID tag allowing them to enter the stadium . 
 = Suffolk Punch = 
 The Suffolk Punch , also historically known as the Suffolk Horse or Suffolk Sorrel , is an English breed of draught horse . The breed takes the first part of its name from the county of Suffolk in East Anglia , and the name " Punch " from its solid appearance and strength . It is a heavy draught horse which is always chestnut in colour , traditionally spelled " chesnut " by the breed registries . Suffolk Punches are known as good doers , and tend to have energetic gaits . 
 The breed was developed in the early 16th century , and remains similar in phenotype to its founding stock . The Suffolk Punch was developed for farm work , and gained popularity during the early 20th century . However , as agriculture became increasingly mechanised , the breed fell out of favour , particularly from the middle part of the century , and almost disappeared completely . Although the breed 's status is listed as critical by the UK Rare Breeds Survival Trust and the American Livestock Breeds Conservancy , there has been a resurgence in interest , and population numbers are increasing . As well as being used for farm work , the breed pulled artillery and non @-@ motorised commercial vans and buses . It was also exported to other countries to upgrade local equine stock . Today , they are used for draught work , forestry and advertising . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Suffolk Punches generally stand 16 @.@ 1 to 17 @.@ 2 hands ( 65 to 70 inches , 165 to 178 cm ) , weigh 1 @,@ 980 to 2 @,@ 200 pounds ( 900 to 1 @,@ 000 kg ) , and are always chestnut in colour . The traditional spelling , still used by the Suffolk Horse Society , is " chesnut " ( with no " t " in the middle of the word ) . Horses of the breed come in many different shades of chestnut , ranging from dark to red to light . Suffolk horse breeders in the UK use several different colour terms specific to the breed , including dark liver , dull dark , red and bright . White markings are rare and generally limited to small areas on the face and lower legs . Equestrian author Marguerite Henry described the breed by saying , " His color is bright chestnut – like a tongue of fire against black field furrows , against green corn blades , against yellow wheat , against blue horizons . Never is he any other color . " 
 The Suffolk Punch tends to be shorter but more massively built than other British heavy draught breeds , such as the Clydesdale or the Shire , as a result of having been developed for agricultural work rather than road haulage . The breed has a powerful , arching neck ; well @-@ muscled , sloping shoulders ; a short , wide back ; and a muscular , broad croup . Legs are short and strong , with broad joints ; sound , well @-@ formed hooves ; and little or no feathering on the fetlocks . The movement of the Suffolk Punch is said to be energetic , especially at the trot . The breed tends to mature early , be long @-@ lived , and is economical to keep , needing less feed than other horses of similar type and size . They are hard workers , said to be willing to " pull a heavily laden wagon till [ they ] dropped . " 
 In the past , the Suffolk was often criticised for its poor feet , having hooves that were too small for its body mass . This was corrected by the introduction of classes at major shows in which hoof conformation and structure were judged . This practice , unique among horse breeds , resulted in such an improvement that the Suffolk Punch is now considered to have excellent foot conformation . 
 = = History = = 
 The Suffolk Punch registry is the oldest English breed society . The first known mention of the Suffolk Punch is in William Camden 's Britannia , published in 1586 , in which he describes a working horse of the eastern counties of England that is easily recognisable as the Suffolk Punch . This description makes them the oldest breed of horse that is recognisable in the same form today . A detailed genetic study shows that the Suffolk Punch is closely genetically grouped not only with the Fell and Dales British ponies , but also with the European Haflinger . They were developed in Norfolk and Suffolk in the east of England , a relatively isolated area . The local farmers developed the Suffolk Punch for farm work , for which they needed a horse with power , stamina , health , longevity , and docility , and they bred the Suffolk to comply with these needs . Because the farmers used these horses on their land , they seldom had any to sell , which helped to keep the bloodlines pure and unchanged . 
 The foundation sire of the modern Suffolk Punch breed was a 15 @.@ 2 hands ( 62 inches , 157 cm ) stallion foaled near Woodbridge in 1768 and owned by Thomas Crisp of Ufford . At this time the breed was known as the Suffolk Sorrel . This horse was never named , and is simply known as " Crisp 's horse " . Although it is commonly ( and mistakenly ) thought that this was the first horse of the breed , by the 1760s , all other male lines of the breed had died out , resulting in a genetic bottleneck . Another bottleneck occurred in the late 18th century . 
 In 1784 , the breed was described as " 15 hands ( 60 inches , 152 cm ) high , short and compact with bony legs , often light sorrel in color , gentle , tractable , strong " and with " shoulders loaded with flesh " . During its development , the breed was influenced by the Norfolk Trotter , Norfolk Cob , and later the Thoroughbred . The uniform colouring derives in part from a small trotting stallion named Blakes Farmer , foaled in 1760 . Other breeds were cross bred in an attempt to increase the size and stature of the Suffolk Punch , as well as to improve the shoulders , but they had little lasting influence , and the breed remains much as it was before any crossbreeding took place . The Suffolk Horse Society , formed in Britain in 1877 to promote the Suffolk Punch , published its first stud book in 1880 . The first official exports of Suffolks to Canada took place in 1865 . In 1880 , the first Suffolks were imported into the United States , with more following in 1888 and 1903 to begin the breeding of Suffolk Punches in the US . The American Suffolk Horse Association was established and published its first stud book in 1907 . By 1908 , the Suffolk had also been exported from England to Spain , France , Germany , Austria , Russia , Sweden , various parts of Africa , New Zealand , Australia , Argentina and other countries . 
 By the time of the First World War , the Suffolk Punch had become a popular work horse on large farms in East Anglia due to its good temperament and excellent work ethic . It remained popular until the Second World War , when a combination of the need for increased wartime food production ( which resulted in many horses being sent to the slaughterhouse ) , and increased farm mechanisation which followed the war decimated population numbers . Only nine foals were registered with the Suffolk Horse Society in 1966 , but there has been a revival of interest in the breed since the late 1960s and numbers have risen continuously . The breed did remain rare , and in 1998 there were only 80 breeding mares in Britain , producing around 40 foals per year . In the United States , the American Suffolk Horse Association became inactive after the war and remained so for 15 years , but restarted in May 1961 as the draught horse market began to recover . In the 1970s and early 1980s , the American registry allowed some Belgians to be bred to Suffolk Punches , but only the fillies from these crosses were permitted registry with the American Suffolk Horse Association . 
 As of 2001 , horses bred with American bloodlines were not allowed to be registered with the British Association , and the breed was considered the rarest horse breed in Britain . Although the Suffolk Punch population has continued to increase , the Rare Breeds Survival Trust of the UK considers their survival status critical , with between 800 and 1 @,@ 200 horses in the United States and around 150 in England . The American Livestock Breeds Conservancy also lists the breed as critical . The Suffolk Horse Society recorded the births of 36 pure @-@ bred foals in 2007 , and a further 33 foals as of March 2008 . 
 = = Uses = = 
 The Suffolk Punch was used mainly for draught work on farms , but was also often used to pull heavy artillery in wartime . Like other heavy horses , they were also used to pull non @-@ motorised vans and other commercial vehicles . Today , they are used for commercial forestry operations , for other draught work , and in advertising . They are also used for crossbreeding , to produce heavy sport horses for use in hunter and show jumping competition . As a symbol of the county in which they are based , Ipswich Town F.C. incorporate a Suffolk Punch as a dominant part of their team crest . 
 The Suffolk Punch contributed significantly to the creation of the Jutland breed in Denmark . Oppenheimer LXII , a Suffolk Punch imported to Denmark in the 1860s by noted Suffolk dealer Oppenheimer of Hamburg , was one of the founding stallions of the Jutland . Oppenheimer specialised in selling Suffolk Punches , importing them to the Mecklenburg Stud in Germany . The stallion Oppenheimer founded the Jutland breed 's most important bloodline , through his descendant <unk> Munkedal . Suffolks were also exported to Pakistan in the 20th century , to be used in upgrading native breeds , and they have been crossed with Pakistani horses and donkeys to create army remounts and mules . Suffolks have adapted well to the Pakistani climate , despite their large size , and the programme has been successful . The Vladimir Heavy Draft , a draught breed from the former USSR , is another which has been influenced by the Suffolk . 
 = Staten Island Peace Conference = 
 The Staten Island Peace Conference was a brief meeting held in the hope of bringing an end to the American Revolutionary War . The conference took place on September 11 , 1776 , at Billop Manor , the residence of Colonel Christopher Billop , on Staten Island , New York . The participants were the British Admiral Lord Richard Howe , and members of the Second Continental Congress John Adams , Benjamin Franklin , and Edward Rutledge . 
 Since Lord Howe 's authority was , by design , extremely limited , the Congressional delegation was pessimistic about the meeting 's outcome . The conference , held in the days after the British capture of Long Island , lasted just three hours and was a failure . The Americans insisted on recognition of their recently declared independence , and Howe 's limited authority was inadequate to deal with that development . After the conference , the British continued their military campaign for control of New York City . 
