 = = Background = = 
 When British authorities were planning how to deal with their rebellious North American colonies in late 1775 and early 1776 , they decided to send a large military expedition to occupy New York City . Two brothers , Admiral Lord Richard Howe and General William Howe , were given command of the naval and land aspects of the operation respectively . Since they believed it might still be possible to end the dispute without further violence , the Howe brothers insisted on being granted diplomatic powers in addition to their military roles . Admiral Howe had previously discussed colonial grievances informally with Benjamin Franklin in 1774 and 1775 , without resolution . General Howe believed that the problem of colonial taxation could be resolved while retaining the supremacy of Parliament . At first King George III reluctantly agreed to grant the Howes limited powers , but Lord George Germain took a harder line , and insisted that the Howes not be given any powers that might be seen as giving in to the colonial demands for relief from taxation without representation or the so @-@ called Intolerable Acts . As a consequence , the Howes were only granted the ability to issue pardons and amnesties , but not to make any substantive concessions . The commissioners were also mandated to seek dissolution of the Continental Congress , re @-@ establishment of the pre @-@ war colonial assemblies , acceptance of the terms of Lord North 's <unk> Resolution regarding self @-@ taxation , and to promise a further discussion of colonial grievances . No concessions could be made unless hostilities were ended and colonial assemblies made specific admissions of Parliamentary supremacy . 
 After the fleet arrived in July 1776 , Admiral Howe made several attempts to open communications with Continental Army General George Washington . Two attempts to deliver letters to Washington were rebuffed because Howe refused to recognize Washington 's title . Washington did however agree to meet in person with one of Howe 's adjutants , Colonel James Patterson . In the meeting on July 20 , Washington learned that the Howes ' diplomatic powers were essentially limited to the granting of pardons , to which he responded that the Americans had not committed any faults and thus did not need pardons . Lord Howe then sent a letter to Benjamin Franklin detailing a proposal for a truce and offers of pardons . After Franklin read the letter in Congress on July 30 , he wrote back to the admiral that " Directing pardons to be offered to the colonies , who are the very parties injured , [ ... ] can have no other effect than that of increasing our resentments . It is impossible we should think of submission to a government that has with the most wanton barbarity and cruelty burnt our defenseless town , [ ... ] excited the savages to massacre our peaceful farmers , and our slaves to murder their masters , and is even now bringing foreign mercenaries to deluge our settlements with blood . " He also pointed out to the admiral that " you once gave me expectations that reconciliation might take place . " Howe was apparently somewhat taken aback by Franklin 's forceful response . 
 In the Battle of Long Island on August 27 , 1776 , British forces successfully occupied western Long Island ( modern Brooklyn ) , compelling Washington to withdraw his army to Manhattan . General Howe then paused to consolidate his gains , and the brothers decided to make a diplomatic overture . During the battle they had captured several high @-@ ranking Continental Army officers , including Major General John Sullivan . The Howes managed to convince Sullivan that a conference with members of the Continental Congress might yield fruit , and released him on parole to deliver a message to the Congress in Philadelphia , proposing an informal meeting to discuss ending the armed conflict between Britain and its rebellious colonies . After Sullivan 's speech to Congress , John Adams cynically commented on this diplomatic attempt , calling Sullivan a " decoy @-@ duck " and accusing the British of sending Sullivan " to seduce us into a renunciation of our independence " ; others noted that it appeared to be an attempt to blame Congress for prolonging the war . The Congress did however agree to send three of its members – Adams , Benjamin Franklin and Edward Rutledge – to a conference with Lord Howe . They were instructed " to ask a few Questions and take [ Howe 's ] Answers " , but had no further authority . When Howe learned of the committee 's limited authority , he briefly considered calling the meeting off , but decided to proceed after discussion with his brother . None of the commissioners believed the conference would amount to anything . 
 Lord Howe initially sought to meet with the men as private citizens , since British policy did not recognize the Congress as a legitimate authority . In order that the conference might take place , he agreed to the American demand that they be recognized as official representatives of the Congress . 
 = = Meeting = = 
 The house of Christopher Billop on Staten Island was selected to be the meeting place . It had been occupied by British troops for use as a barracks and was in filthy condition , but one room was cleaned and prepared for the meeting . The arrangements included one British officer to be left on the American side as a hostage during the meeting ; the Congressional delegation , rather than leaving him behind the American lines , invited him to accompany them . On arrival , the delegation was escorted past a line of Hessian soldiers and into the house , where , according to Adams , a repast of claret , ham , mutton , and tongue was served . 
 The meeting lasted three hours , and the two sides were unable to find any common ground . The Americans insisted that any negotiations required British recognition of their recently declared independence . Lord Howe stated he did not have the authority to meet that demand . When asked by Edward Rutledge whether he had the authority to repeal the Prohibitory Act ( which authorized a naval blockade of the colonies ) as had been claimed by Sullivan , Howe demurred , claiming Sullivan was mistaken . Howe 's authority included the ability to suspend its execution , provided the colonies agreed to make fixed contributions instead of the taxes Parliament had levied on them . None of this could be done unless the colonies first agreed to end hostilities . 
 For most of the meeting , both sides were cordial . But when Lord Howe expressed that he would feel America 's loss " like the loss of a brother " , Franklin informed him that " we will do our utmost endeavors to save your lordship that mortification . " Lord Howe unhappily stated he could not view the American delegates as anything but British subjects , to which Adams replied , " Your lordship may consider me in what light you please , [ ... ] except that of a British subject . " Lord Howe then spoke past Adams to Franklin and Rutledge , stating , " Mr. Adams appears to be a decided character . " 
 = = Effects = = 
 The Congressmen returned to Philadelphia and reported that Lord Howe " has no propositions to make us " and that " America is to expect nothing but total unconditional submission . " John Adams learned many years later that his name was on a list of people specifically excluded from any pardon offers the Howes might make . Congress published the committee 's report without comment . Because Lord Howe did not also publish an account of the meeting , the meeting 's outcome was perceived by many as a sign of British weakness ; however , many Loyalists and some British observers suspected the Congressional report misrepresented the meeting . One British commentator wrote of the meeting , " They met , they talked , they parted . And now nothing remains but to fight it out . " Lord Howe reported the failure of the conference to his brother , and they then made preparations to continue the campaign for New York City . Four days after the conference , British troops landed on Manhattan and occupied New York City . 
 Parliamentary debate over the terms of the diplomatic mission and its actions prompted some opposition ( Whig ) members to essentially boycott Parliamentary proceedings . The next major peace effort occurred in 1778 , when the British sent commissioners led by the Earl of Carlisle to occupied Philadelphia . They were authorized to treat with Congress as a body , and offered self @-@ government that was roughly equivalent to Dominion status . This effort was undermined by the planned withdrawal of British troops from Philadelphia and by American demands that the commissioners were not authorized to grant . 
 The house where the conference took place is now preserved as a museum within Conference House Park , a city park . It is a National Historic Landmark , and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = Surrender of Japan = 
 The surrender of Japan was announced by Imperial Japan on August 15 and formally signed on September 2 , 1945 , bringing the hostilities of World War II to a close . By the end of July 1945 , the Imperial Japanese Navy was incapable of conducting major operations and an Allied invasion of Japan was imminent . Together with the United Kingdom and China , the United States called for the unconditional surrender of the Japanese armed forces in the Potsdam Declaration on July 26 , 1945 — the alternative being " prompt and utter destruction " . While publicly stating their intent to fight on to the bitter end , Japan 's leaders ( the Supreme Council for the Direction of the War , also known as the " Big Six " ) were privately making entreaties to the still @-@ neutral Soviet Union to mediate peace on terms more favorable to the Japanese . Meanwhile , the Soviets were preparing to attack Japanese forces in Manchuria and Korea ( in addition to southern Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands ) in fulfillment of promises they had secretly made to the United States and the United Kingdom at the Tehran and Yalta Conferences . 
 On August 6 , 1945 , at 8 : 15 AM local time , the United States detonated an atomic bomb over the Japanese city of Hiroshima . Sixteen hours later , American President Harry S. Truman called again for Japan 's surrender , warning them to " expect a rain of ruin from the air , the like of which has never been seen on this earth . " Late in the evening of August 8 , 1945 , in accordance with the Yalta agreements , but in violation of the Soviet – Japanese Neutrality Pact , the Soviet Union declared war on Japan , and soon after midnight on August 9 , 1945 , the Soviet Union invaded the Imperial Japanese puppet state of Manchukuo . Later in the day , the United States dropped a second atomic bomb , this time on the Japanese city of Nagasaki . Following these events , Emperor Hirohito intervened and ordered the Supreme Council for the Direction of the War to accept the terms the Allies had set down in the Potsdam Declaration for ending the war . After several more days of behind @-@ the @-@ scenes negotiations and a failed coup d 'état , Emperor Hirohito gave a recorded radio address across the Empire on August 15 . In the radio address , called the Jewel Voice Broadcast ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ hōsō ) , he announced the surrender of Japan to the Allies . 
 On August 28 , the occupation of Japan by the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers began . The surrender ceremony was held on September 2 , aboard the United States Navy battleship USS Missouri ( BB @-@ 63 ) , at which officials from the Japanese government signed the Japanese Instrument of Surrender , thereby ending the hostilities . Allied civilians and military personnel alike celebrated V @-@ J Day , the end of the war ; however , some isolated soldiers and personnel from Imperial Japan 's far @-@ flung forces throughout Asia and the Pacific islands refused to surrender for months and years afterwards , some even refusing into the 1970s . The role of the atomic bombings in Japan 's unconditional surrender , and the ethics of the two attacks , is still debated . The state of war formally ended when the Treaty of San Francisco came into force on April 28 , 1952 . Four more years passed before Japan and the Soviet Union signed the Soviet – Japanese Joint Declaration of 1956 , which formally brought an end to their state of war . 
 = = Impending defeat = = 
 By 1945 , the Japanese had suffered an unbroken string of defeats for nearly two years in the South West Pacific , the Marianas campaign , and the Philippines campaign . In July 1944 , following the loss of Saipan , General Hideki Tōjō was replaced as prime minister by General Kuniaki Koiso , who declared that the Philippines would be the site of the decisive battle . After the Japanese loss of the Philippines , Koiso in turn was replaced by Admiral Kantarō Suzuki . The Allies captured the nearby islands of Iwo Jima and Okinawa in the first half of 1945 . Okinawa was to be a staging area for Operation Downfall , the American invasion of the Japanese Home Islands . Following Germany 's defeat , the Soviet Union quietly began redeploying its battle @-@ hardened European forces to the Far East , in addition to about forty divisions that had been stationed there since 1941 , as a counterbalance to the million @-@ strong Kwantung Army . 
 The Allied submarine campaign and the mining of Japanese coastal waters had largely destroyed the Japanese merchant fleet . With few natural resources , Japan was dependent on raw materials , particularly oil , imported from Manchuria and other parts of the East Asian mainland , and from the conquered territory in the Dutch East Indies . The destruction of the Japanese merchant fleet , combined with the strategic bombing of Japanese industry , had wrecked Japan 's war economy . Production of coal , iron , steel , rubber , and other vital supplies was only a fraction of that before the war . 
 As a result of the losses it had suffered , the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) had ceased to be an effective fighting force . Following a series of raids on the Japanese shipyard at Kure , Japan , the only major warships in fighting order were six aircraft carriers , four cruisers , and one battleship , none of which could be fueled adequately . Although 19 destroyers and 38 submarines were still operational , their use was limited by the lack of fuel . 
 = = = Defense preparations = = = 
 Faced with the prospect of an invasion of the Home Islands , starting with Kyūshū , and the prospect of a Soviet invasion of Manchuria — Japan 's last source of natural resources — the War Journal of the Imperial Headquarters concluded : 
 We can no longer direct the war with any hope of success . The only course left is for Japan 's one hundred million people to sacrifice their lives by charging the enemy to make them lose the will to fight . 
 As a final attempt to stop the Allied advances , the Japanese Imperial High Command planned an all @-@ out defense of Kyūshū codenamed Operation Ketsugō . This was to be a radical departure from the defense in depth plans used in the invasions of Peleliu , Iwo Jima , and Okinawa . Instead , everything was staked on the beachhead ; more than 3 @,@ 000 kamikazes would be sent to attack the amphibious transports before troops and cargo were disembarked on the beach . 
 If this did not drive the Allies away , they planned to send another 3 @,@ 500 kamikazes along with 5 @,@ 000 Shin 'yō suicide boats and the remaining destroyers and submarines — " the last of the Navy 's operating fleet " — to the beach . If the Allies had fought through this and successfully landed on Kyūshū , only 3 @,@ 000 planes would have been left to defend the remaining islands , although Kyūshū would be " defended to the last " regardless . The strategy of making a last stand at Kyūshū was based on the assumption of continued Soviet neutrality . 
 A set of caves were excavated near Nagano on Honshu , the largest of the Japanese islands . In the event of invasion , these caves , the <unk> Underground Imperial Headquarters , were to be used by the army to direct the war and to house the Emperor and his family . 
 = = Supreme Council for the Direction of the War = = 
 Japanese policy @-@ making centered on the Supreme Council for the Direction of the War ( created in 1944 by earlier Prime Minister Kuniaki Koiso ) , the so @-@ called " Big Six " — the Prime Minister , Minister of Foreign Affairs , Minister of the Army , Minister of the Navy , Chief of the Army General Staff , and Chief of the Navy General Staff . At the formation of the Suzuki government in April 1945 , the council 's membership consisted of : 
 Prime Minister : Admiral Kantarō Suzuki 
 Minister of Foreign Affairs : Shigenori Tōgō 
 Minister of the Army : General Korechika Anami 
 Minister of the Navy : Admiral Mitsumasa Yonai 
 Chief of the Army General Staff : General <unk> Umezu 
 Chief of the Navy General Staff : Admiral <unk> Oikawa ( later replaced by Admiral Soemu Toyoda ) 
 All of these positions were nominally appointed by the Emperor and their holders were answerable directly to him . Nevertheless , from 1936 the Japanese Army and Navy held , effectively , a legal right to nominate ( or refuse to nominate ) their respective ministers . Thus , they could prevent the formation of undesirable governments , or by resignation bring about the collapse of an existing government . 
 Emperor Hirohito and Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal Kōichi Kido also were present at some meetings , following the Emperor 's wishes . As Iris Chang reports , " the Japanese deliberately destroyed , hid or falsified most of their secret wartime documents . " 
 = = Divisions within the Japanese leadership = = 
 For the most part , Suzuki 's military @-@ dominated cabinet favored continuing the war . For the Japanese , surrender was unthinkable — Japan had never been invaded or lost a war in its history . Only Mitsumasa Yonai , the Navy minister , was known to desire an early end to the war . According to historian Richard B. Frank : 
 Although Suzuki might indeed have seen peace as a distant goal , he had no design to achieve it within any immediate time span or on terms acceptable to the Allies . His own comments at the conference of senior statesmen gave no hint that he favored any early cessation of the war ... Suzuki 's selections for the most critical cabinet posts were , with one exception , not advocates of peace either . 
 After the war , Suzuki and others from his government and their apologists claimed they were secretly working towards peace , and could not publicly advocate it . They cite the Japanese concept of <unk> — " the art of hidden and invisible technique " — to justify the dissonance between their public actions and alleged behind @-@ the @-@ scenes work . However , many historians reject this . Robert J. C. <unk> wrote : 
 Because of its very ambiguity , the plea of <unk> invites the suspicion that in questions of politics and diplomacy a conscious reliance upon this ' art of bluff ' may have constituted a purposeful deception predicated upon a desire to play both ends against the middle . While this judgment does not accord with the much @-@ lauded character of Admiral Suzuki , the fact remains that from the moment he became Premier until the day he resigned no one could ever be quite sure of what Suzuki would do or say next . 
 Japanese leaders had always envisioned a negotiated settlement to the war . Their prewar planning expected a rapid expansion and consolidation , an eventual conflict with the United States , and finally a settlement in which they would be able to retain at least some new territory they had conquered . By 1945 , Japan 's leaders were in agreement that the war was going badly , but they disagreed over the best means to negotiate its end . There were two camps : the so @-@ called " peace " camp favored a diplomatic initiative to persuade Joseph Stalin , the leader of the Soviet Union , to mediate a settlement between the Allies and Japan ; and the hardliners who favored fighting one last " decisive " battle that would inflict so many casualties on the Allies that they would be willing to offer more lenient terms . Both approaches were based on Japan 's experience in the Russo – Japanese War , forty years earlier , which consisted of a series of costly but largely indecisive battles , followed by the decisive naval Battle of Tsushima . 
 In February 1945 , Prince Fumimaro Konoe gave Emperor Hirohito a memorandum analyzing the situation , and told him that if the war continued , the imperial family might be in greater danger from an internal revolution than from defeat . According to the diary of Grand Chamberlain Hisanori Fujita , the Emperor , looking for a decisive battle ( <unk> ) , replied that it was premature to seek peace " unless we make one more military gain " . Also in February , Japan 's treaty division wrote about Allied policies towards Japan regarding " unconditional surrender , occupation , disarmament , elimination of militarism , democratic reforms , punishment of war criminals , and the status of the emperor . " Allied @-@ imposed disarmament , Allied punishment of Japanese war criminals , and especially occupation and removal of the Emperor , were not acceptable to the Japanese leadership . 
 On April 5 , the Soviet Union gave the required 12 months ' notice that it would not renew the five @-@ year Soviet – Japanese Neutrality Pact ( which had been signed in 1941 following the <unk> Incident ) . Unknown to the Japanese , at the Tehran Conference in November – December 1943 , it had been agreed that the Soviet Union would enter the war against Japan once Nazi Germany was defeated . At the Yalta conference in February 1945 , the United States had made substantial concessions to the Soviets to secure a promise that they would declare war on Japan within three months of the surrender of Germany . Although the five @-@ year Neutrality Pact did not expire until April 5 , 1946 , the announcement caused the Japanese great concern , because Japan had amassed its forces in the South to repel the inevitable US attack , thus leaving its Northern islands vulnerable to Soviet invasion . Russian Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov , in Moscow , and Yakov Malik , Soviet ambassador in Tokyo , went to great lengths to assure the Japanese that " the period of the Pact 's validity has not ended " . 
 At a series of high @-@ level meetings in May , the Big Six first seriously discussed ending the war — but none of them on terms that would have been acceptable to the Allies . Because anyone openly supporting Japanese surrender risked assassination by zealous army officers , the meetings were closed to anyone except the Big Six , the Emperor , and the Privy Seal — no second- or third @-@ echelon officers could attend . At these meetings , despite the dispatches from Japanese ambassador Satō in Moscow , only Foreign minister Tōgō realized that Roosevelt and Churchill might have already made concessions to Stalin to bring the Soviets into the war against Japan . As a result of these meetings , Tōgō was authorized to approach the Soviet Union , seeking to maintain its neutrality , or ( despite the very remote probability ) to form an alliance . 
 In keeping with the custom of a new government declaring its purposes , following the May meetings the Army staff produced a document , " The Fundamental Policy to Be Followed Henceforth in the Conduct of the War , " which stated that the Japanese people would fight to extinction rather than surrender . This policy was adopted by the Big Six on June 6 . ( Tōgō opposed it , while the other five supported it . ) Documents submitted by Suzuki at the same meeting suggested that , in the diplomatic overtures to the USSR , Japan adopt the following approach : 
 It should be clearly made known to Russia that she owes her victory over Germany to Japan , since we remained neutral , and that it would be to the advantage of the Soviets to help Japan maintain her international position , since they have the United States as an enemy in the future . 
 On June 9 , the Emperor 's confidant Marquis Kōichi Kido wrote a " Draft Plan for Controlling the Crisis Situation , " warning that by the end of the year Japan 's ability to wage modern war would be extinguished and the government would be unable to contain civil unrest . " ... We cannot be sure we will not share the fate of Germany and be reduced to adverse circumstances under which we will not attain even our supreme object of safeguarding the Imperial Household and preserving the national polity . " Kido proposed that the Emperor take action , by offering to end the war on " very generous terms . " Kido proposed that Japan withdraw from the formerly European colonies it had occupied provided they were granted independence , that Japan disarm provided this not occur under Allied supervision , and that Japan for a time be " content with minimum defense . " Kido 's proposal did not contemplate Allied occupation of Japan , prosecution of war criminals or substantial change in Japan 's system of government . With the Emperor 's authorization , Kido approached several members of the Supreme Council , the " Big Six . " Tōgō was very supportive . Suzuki and Admiral Mitsumasa Yonai , the Navy minister , were both cautiously supportive ; each wondered what the other thought . General Korechika Anami , the Army minister , was ambivalent , insisting that diplomacy must wait until " after the United States has sustained heavy losses " in Operation Ketsugō . 
 In June , the Emperor lost confidence in the chances of achieving a military victory . The Battle of Okinawa was lost , and he learned of the weakness of the Japanese army in China , of the Kwantung Army in Manchuria , of the navy , and of the army defending the Home Islands . The Emperor received a report by Prince Higashikuni from which he concluded that " it was not just the coast defense ; the divisions reserved to engage in the decisive battle also did not have sufficient numbers of weapons . " According to the Emperor : 
 I was told that the iron from bomb fragments dropped by the enemy was being used to make shovels . This confirmed my opinion that we were no longer in a position to continue the war . 
 On June 22 , the Emperor summoned the Big Six to a meeting . Unusually , he spoke first : " I desire that concrete plans to end the war , unhampered by existing policy , be speedily studied and that efforts made to implement them . " It was agreed to solicit Soviet aid in ending the war . Other neutral nations , such as Switzerland , Sweden , and the Vatican City , were known to be willing to play a role in making peace , but they were so small they were believed unable to do more than deliver the Allies ' terms of surrender and Japan 's acceptance or rejection . The Japanese hoped that the Soviet Union could be persuaded to act as an agent for Japan in negotiations with America and Britain . 
 = = Attempts to deal with the Soviet Union = = 
 On June 30 , Tōgō told <unk> Satō , Japan 's ambassador in Moscow , to try to establish " firm and lasting relations of friendship . " Satō was to discuss the status of Manchuria and " any matter the Russians would like to bring up . " Well aware of the overall situation and cognizant of their promises to the Allies , the Soviets responded with delaying tactics to encourage the Japanese without promising anything . Satō finally met with Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov on July 11 , but without result . On July 12 , Tōgō directed Satō to tell the Soviets that : 
 His Majesty the Emperor , mindful of the fact that the present war daily brings greater evil and sacrifice upon the peoples of all the belligerent powers , desires from his heart that it may be quickly terminated . But so long as England and the United States insist upon unconditional surrender , the Japanese Empire has no alternative but to fight on with all its strength for the honor and existence of the Motherland . 
 The Emperor proposed sending Prince Konoe as a special envoy , although he would be unable to reach Moscow before the Potsdam Conference . 
 Satō advised Tōgō that in reality , " unconditional surrender or terms closely equivalent thereto " was all that Japan could expect . Moreover , in response to Molotov 's requests for specific proposals , Satō suggested that Tōgō 's messages were not " clear about the views of the Government and the Military with regard to the termination of the war , " thus questioning whether Tōgō 's initiative was supported by the key elements of Japan 's power structure . 
 On July 17 , Tōgō responded : 
 Although the directing powers , and the government as well , are convinced that our war strength still can deliver considerable blows to the enemy , we are unable to feel absolutely secure peace of mind ... Please bear particularly in mind , however , that we are not seeking the Russians ' mediation for anything like an unconditional surrender . 
 In reply , Satō clarified : 
 It goes without saying that in my earlier message calling for unconditional surrender or closely equivalent terms , I made an exception of the question of preserving [ the imperial family ] . 
 On July 21 , speaking in the name of the cabinet , Tōgō repeated : 
 With regard to unconditional surrender we are unable to consent to it under any circumstances whatever . ... It is in order to avoid such a state of affairs that we are seeking a peace , ... through the good offices of Russia . ... it would also be disadvantageous and impossible , from the standpoint of foreign and domestic considerations , to make an immediate declaration of specific terms . 
 American cryptographers had broken most of Japan 's codes , including the Purple code used by the Japanese Foreign Office to encode high @-@ level diplomatic correspondence . As a result , messages between Tokyo and Japan 's embassies were provided to Allied policy @-@ makers nearly as quickly as to the intended recipients . 
 = = = Soviet intentions = = = 
 Security concerns dominated Soviet decisions concerning the Far East . Chief among these was gaining unrestricted access to the Pacific Ocean . The year @-@ round ice @-@ free areas of the Soviet Pacific coastline — Vladivostok in particular — could be blockaded by air and sea from Sakhalin island and the Kurile Islands . Acquiring these territories , thus guaranteeing free access to the Soya Strait , was their primary objective . Secondary objectives were leases for the Chinese Eastern Railway , Southern Manchuria Railway , Dairen , and Port Arthur . 
 To this end , Stalin and Molotov strung out the negotiations with the Japanese , giving them false hope of a Soviet @-@ mediated peace . At the same time , in their dealings with the United States and Britain , the Soviets insisted on strict adherence to the Cairo Declaration , re @-@ affirmed at the Yalta Conference , that the Allies would not accept separate or conditional peace with Japan . The Japanese would have to surrender unconditionally to all the Allies . To prolong the war , the Soviets opposed any attempt to weaken this requirement . This would give the Soviets time to complete the transfer of their troops from the Western Front to the Far East , and conquer Manchuria ( Manchukuo ) , Inner Mongolia ( <unk> ) , Korea , Sakhalin , the <unk> , and possibly , Hokkaidō ( starting with a landing at <unk> ) . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 In 1939 , Albert Einstein and Leó Szilárd wrote a letter to President Roosevelt warning him that the Germans might be researching the development of atomic weaponry and that it was necessary that the United States fund research and development of its own such project . Roosevelt agreed , and the result was the Manhattan Project — a top @-@ secret research program administered by General Leslie Groves , with scientific direction from J. Robert Oppenheimer . The first bomb was tested successfully in the Trinity explosion on July 16 , 1945 . 
 As the project neared its conclusion , American planners began to consider the use of the bomb . Groves formed a committee that met in April and May 1945 to draw up a list of targets . One of the primary criteria was that the target cities must not have been damaged by conventional bombing . This would allow for an accurate assessment of the damage done by the atomic bomb . The targeting committee 's list included 18 Japanese cities . At the top of the list were Kyoto , Hiroshima , Yokohama , Kokura , and Niigata . Ultimately , Kyoto was removed from the list at the insistence of Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson , who had visited the city on his honeymoon and knew of its cultural and historical significance . 
 The Allies ' atomic bomb program was considered to be so sensitive that not even the Vice President of the United States was told of its existence . As a result , Harry S. Truman only learned about the Manhattan Project and its purpose after becoming President upon Franklin Roosevelt 's death on April 12 . In May , Truman approved the formation of an " Interim Committee " , an advisory group that would report on the atomic bomb . It consisted of George L. Harrison , Vannevar Bush , James Bryant Conant , Karl Taylor Compton , William L. Clayton , and Ralph Austin Bard , advised by scientists Oppenheimer , Enrico Fermi , Ernest Lawrence , and Arthur Compton . In a June 1 report , the Committee concluded that the bomb should be used as soon as possible against a war plant surrounded by workers ' homes , and that no warning or demonstration should be given . 
 The Committee 's mandate did not include the use of the bomb — its use upon completion was presumed . Following a protest by scientists involved in the project , in the form of the Franck Report , the Committee re @-@ examined the use of the bomb . In a June 21 meeting , it reaffirmed that there was no alternative . 
 = = Events at Potsdam = = 
 The leaders of the major Allied powers met at the Potsdam Conference from July 16 to August 2 , 1945 . The participants were the Soviet Union , the United Kingdom , and the United States , represented by Stalin , Winston Churchill ( later Clement Attlee ) , and Truman respectively . 
 = = = Negotiations = = = 
 Although the Potsdam Conference was mainly concerned with European affairs , the war against Japan was also discussed in detail . Truman learned of the successful Trinity test early in the conference , and shared this information with the British delegation . The successful test caused the American delegation to reconsider the necessity and wisdom of Soviet participation , for which the U.S. had lobbied hard at the Tehran and Yalta Conferences . High on the United States ' list of priorities was shortening the war and reducing American casualties — Soviet intervention seemed likely to do both , but at the cost of possibly allowing the Soviets to capture territory beyond that which had been promised to them at Tehran and Yalta , and causing a postwar division of Japan similar to that which had occurred in Germany . 
 In dealing with Stalin , Truman decided to give the Soviet leader vague hints about the existence of a powerful new weapon without going into details . However , the other Allies were unaware that Soviet intelligence had penetrated the Manhattan Project in its early stages , so Stalin already knew of the existence of the atomic bomb , but did not appear impressed by its potential . 
 = = = The Potsdam Declaration = = = 
 It was decided to issue a statement , the Potsdam Declaration , defining " Unconditional Surrender " and clarifying what it meant for the position of the emperor and for Hirohito personally . The American and British governments strongly disagreed on this point — the United States wanted to abolish the position and possibly try him as a war criminal , while the British wanted to retain the position , perhaps with Hirohito still reigning . The Potsdam Declaration went through many drafts until a version acceptable to all was found . 
 On July 26 , the United States , Britain and China released the Potsdam Declaration announcing the terms for Japan 's surrender , with the warning , " We will not deviate from them . There are no alternatives . We shall brook no delay . " For Japan , the terms of the declaration specified : 
 the elimination " for all time [ of ] the authority and influence of those who have deceived and misled the people of Japan into embarking on world conquest " 
 the occupation of " points in Japanese territory to be designated by the Allies " 
 that the " Japanese sovereignty shall be limited to the islands of Honshū , Hokkaidō , Kyūshū , Shikoku and such minor islands as we determine . " As had been announced in the Cairo Declaration in 1943 , Japan was to be reduced to her pre @-@ 1894 territory and stripped of her pre @-@ war empire including Korea and Taiwan , as well as all her recent conquests . 
 that " [ t ] he Japanese military forces , after being completely disarmed , shall be permitted to return to their homes with the opportunity to lead peaceful and productive lives . " 
 that " [ w ] e do not intend that the Japanese shall be enslaved as a race or destroyed as a nation , but stern justice shall be meted out to all war criminals , including those who have visited cruelties upon our prisoners . " 
 On the other hand , the declaration stated that : 
 " The Japanese Government shall remove all obstacles to the revival and strengthening of democratic tendencies among the Japanese people . Freedom of speech , of religion , and of thought , as well as respect for the fundamental human rights shall be established . " 
 " Japan shall be permitted to maintain such industries as will sustain her economy and permit the exaction of just reparations in kind , but not those which would enable her to rearm for war . To this end , access to , as distinguished from control of , raw materials shall be permitted . Eventual Japanese participation in world trade relations shall be permitted . " 
 " The occupying forces of the Allies shall be withdrawn from Japan as soon as these objectives have been accomplished and there has been established , in accordance with the freely expressed will of the Japanese people , a peacefully inclined and responsible government . " 
 The only use of the term " unconditional surrender " came at the end of the declaration : 
 " We call upon the government of Japan to proclaim now the unconditional surrender of all Japanese armed forces , and to provide proper and adequate assurances of their good faith in such action . The alternative for Japan is prompt and utter destruction . " 
 Contrary to what had been intended at its conception , the Declaration made no mention of the Emperor at all . Allied intentions on issues of utmost importance to the Japanese , including whether Hirohito was to be regarded as one of those who had " misled the people of Japan " or even a war criminal , or alternatively , whether the Emperor might become part of a " peacefully inclined and responsible government " were thus left unstated . 
 The " prompt and utter destruction " clause has been interpreted as a veiled warning about American possession of the atomic bomb ( which had been tested successfully on the first day of the conference ) . On the other hand , the declaration also made specific references to the devastation that had been wrought upon Germany in the closing stages of the European war . To contemporary readers on both sides who were not yet aware of the atomic bomb 's existence , it was easy to interpret the conclusion of the declaration simply as a threat to bring similar destruction upon Japan using conventional weapons . 
 = = = Japanese reaction = = = 
 On July 27 , the Japanese government considered how to respond to the Declaration . The four military members of the Big Six wanted to reject it , but Tōgō persuaded the cabinet not to do so until he could get a reaction from the Soviets . In a telegram , Shun 'ichi Kase , Japan 's ambassador to Switzerland , observed that " unconditional surrender " applied only to the military and not to the government or the people , and he pleaded that it should be understood that the careful language of Potsdam appeared " to have occasioned a great deal of thought " on the part of the signatory governments — " they seem to have taken pains to save face for us on various points . " The next day , Japanese newspapers reported that the Declaration , the text of which had been broadcast and dropped by leaflet into Japan , had been rejected . In an attempt to manage public perception , Prime Minister Suzuki met with the press , and stated : 
 I consider the Joint Proclamation a rehash of the Declaration at the Cairo Conference . As for the Government , it does not attach any important value to it at all . The only thing to do is just kill it with silence ( mokusatsu ) . We will do nothing but press on to the bitter end to bring about a successful completion of the war . 
 The meaning of mokusatsu , literally " kill with silence , " can range from " ignore " to " treat with contempt " — which rather accurately described the range of reactions within the government . On July 30 , Ambassador Satō wrote that Stalin was probably talking to Roosevelt and Churchill about his dealings with Japan , and he wrote : " There is no alternative but immediate unconditional surrender if we are to prevent Russia 's participation in the war . " On August 2 , Tōgō wrote to Satō : " it should not be difficult for you to realize that ... our time to proceed with arrangements of ending the war before the enemy lands on the Japanese mainland is limited , on the other hand it is difficult to decide on concrete peace conditions here at home all at once . " 
 = = Hiroshima , Manchuria , and Nagasaki = = 
 = = = August 6 : Hiroshima = = = 
 On August 6 at 8 : 15 AM local time , the Enola Gay , a Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress piloted by Colonel Paul Tibbets , dropped an atomic bomb ( code @-@ named Little Boy by the U.S. ) on the city of Hiroshima in southwest Honshū . Throughout the day , confused reports reached Tokyo that Hiroshima had been the target of an air raid , which had leveled the city with a " blinding flash and violent blast " . Later that day , they received U.S. President Truman 's broadcast announcing the first use of an atomic bomb , and promising : 
 We are now prepared to obliterate more rapidly and completely every productive enterprise the Japanese have above ground in any city . We shall destroy their docks , their factories , and their communications . Let there be no mistake ; we shall completely destroy Japan 's power to make war . It was to spare the Japanese people from utter destruction that the ultimatum of July 26 was issued at Potsdam . Their leaders promptly rejected that ultimatum . If they do not now accept our terms they may expect a rain of ruin from the air , the like of which has never been seen on this earth … 
 The Japanese Army and Navy had their own independent atomic @-@ bomb programs and therefore the Japanese understood enough to know how very difficult building it would be . Therefore , many Japanese and in particular the military members of the government refused to believe the United States had built an atomic bomb , and the Japanese military ordered their own independent tests to determine the cause of Hiroshima 's destruction . Admiral Soemu Toyoda , the Chief of the Naval General Staff , argued that even if the United States had made one , they could not have many more . American strategists , having anticipated a reaction like Toyoda 's , planned to drop a second bomb shortly after the first , to convince the Japanese that the U.S. had a large supply . 
 = = = August 8 – 9 : Soviet invasion and Nagasaki = = = 
 At 04 : 00 on August 9 word reached Tokyo that the Soviet Union had broken the Neutrality Pact , declared war on Japan , and launched an invasion of Manchuria . 
 When the Russians invaded Manchuria , they sliced through what had once been an elite army and many Russian units only stopped when they ran out of gas . The Soviet 16th Army — 100 @,@ 000 strong — launched an invasion of the southern half of Sakhalin Island . Their orders were to mop up Japanese resistance there , and then — within 10 to 14 days — be prepared to invade Hokkaido , the northernmost of Japan ’ s home islands . The Japanese force tasked with defending Hokkaido , the 5th Area Army , was under strength at two divisions and two brigades , and was in fortified positions on the east side of the island . The Soviet plan of attack called for an invasion of Hokkaido from the west . The Soviet declaration of war also changed the calculation of how much time was left for maneuver . Japanese intelligence was predicting that U.S. forces might not invade for months . Soviet forces , on the other hand , could be in Japan proper in as little as 10 days . The Soviet invasion made a decision on ending the war extremely time sensitive . 
 These " twin shocks " — the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and the Soviet entry — had immediate profound effects on Prime Minister Suzuki and Foreign Minister Tōgō Shigenori , who concurred that the government must end the war at once . However , the senior leadership of the Japanese Army took the news in stride , grossly underestimating the scale of the attack . With the support of Minister of War Anami , they started preparing to impose martial law on the nation , to stop anyone attempting to make peace . Hirohito told Kido to " quickly control the situation " because " the Soviet Union has declared war and today began hostilities against us . " 
 The Supreme Council met at 10 : 30 . Suzuki , who had just come from a meeting with the Emperor , said it was impossible to continue the war . Tōgō Shigenori said that they could accept the terms of the Potsdam Declaration , but they needed a guarantee of the Emperor 's position . Navy Minister Yonai said that they had to make some diplomatic proposal — they could no longer afford to wait for better circumstances . 
 In the middle of the meeting , shortly after 11 : 00 , news arrived that Nagasaki , on the west coast of Kyūshū , had been hit by a second atomic bomb ( called " Fat Man " by the United States ) . By the time the meeting ended , the Big Six had split 3 – 3 . Suzuki , Tōgō , and Admiral Yonai favored Tōgō 's one additional condition to Potsdam , while Generals Anami , Umezu , and Admiral Toyoda insisted on three further terms that modified Potsdam : that Japan handle their own disarmament , that Japan deal with any Japanese war criminals , and that there be no occupation of Japan . 
 Following the atomic bombing of Nagasaki , Truman issued another statement : 
 The British , Chinese , and United States Governments have given the Japanese people adequate warning of what is in store for them . We have laid down the general terms on which they can surrender . Our warning went unheeded ; our terms were rejected . Since then the Japanese have seen what our atomic bomb can do . They can foresee what it will do in the future . 
 The world will note that the first atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima , a military base . That was because we wished in this first attack to avoid , insofar as possible , the killing of civilians . But that attack is only a warning of things to come . If Japan does not surrender , bombs will have to be dropped on her war industries and , unfortunately , thousands of civilian lives will be lost . I urge Japanese civilians to leave industrial cities immediately , and save themselves from destruction . 
 I realize the tragic significance of the atomic bomb . 
 Its production and its use were not lightly undertaken by this Government . But we knew that our enemies were on the search for it . We know now how close they were to finding it . And we knew the disaster which would come to this Nation , and to all peace @-@ loving nations , to all civilization , if they had found it first . 
 That is why we felt compelled to undertake the long and uncertain and costly labor of discovery and production . 
 We won the race of discovery against the Germans . 
 Having found the bomb we have used it . We have used it against those who attacked us without warning at Pearl Harbor , against those who have starved and beaten and executed American prisoners of war , against those who have abandoned all pretense of obeying international laws of warfare . We have used it in order to shorten the agony of war , in order to save the lives of thousands and thousands of young Americans . 
 We shall continue to use it until we completely destroy Japan 's power to make war . Only a Japanese surrender will stop us . 
 = = Imperial intervention , Allied response , and Japanese reply = = 
 The full cabinet met on 14 : 30 on August 9 , and spent most of the day debating surrender . As the Big Six had done , the cabinet split , with neither Tōgō 's position nor Anami 's attracting a majority . Anami told the other cabinet ministers that , under torture , a captured American P @-@ 51 fighter pilot had told his interrogators that the United States possessed 100 atom bombs and that Tokyo and Kyoto would be bombed " in the next few days " . The pilot , Marcus <unk> , was lying . He knew nothing of the Manhattan Project and simply told his interrogators what he thought they wanted to hear to end the torture . The lie , which caused him to be classified as a high @-@ priority prisoner , probably saved him from beheading . In reality , the United States would have had the third bomb ready for use around August 19 , and a fourth in September 1945 . The third bomb probably would have been used against Tokyo . 
 The cabinet meeting adjourned at 17 : 30 with no consensus . A second meeting lasting from 18 : 00 to 22 : 00 also ended with no consensus . Following this second meeting , Suzuki and Tōgō met the Emperor , and Suzuki proposed an impromptu Imperial conference , which started just before midnight on the night of August 9 – 10 . Suzuki presented Anami 's four @-@ condition proposal as the consensus position of the Supreme Council . The other members of the Supreme Council spoke , as did Kiichirō Hiranuma , the president of the Privy Council , who outlined Japan 's inability to defend itself and also described the country 's domestic problems , such as the shortage of food . The cabinet debated , but again no consensus emerged . At around 02 : 00 ( August 10 ) , Suzuki finally addressed Emperor Hirohito , asking him to decide between the two positions . The participants later recollected that the Emperor stated : 
 I have given serious thought to the situation prevailing at home and abroad and have concluded that continuing the war can only mean destruction for the nation and prolongation of bloodshed and cruelty in the world . I cannot bear to see my innocent people suffer any longer . ... 
 I was told by those advocating a continuation of hostilities that by June new divisions would be in place in fortified positions [ at Kujūkuri Beach , east of Tokyo ] ready for the invader when he sought to land . It is now August and the fortifications still have not been completed . ... 
 There are those who say the key to national survival lies in a decisive battle in the homeland . The experiences of the past , however , show that there has always been a discrepancy between plans and performance . I do not believe that the discrepancy in the case of Kujūkuri can be rectified . Since this is also the shape of things , how can we repel the invaders ? [ He then made some specific reference to the increased destructiveness of the atomic bomb ] 
 It goes without saying that it is unbearable for me to see the brave and loyal fighting men of Japan disarmed . It is equally unbearable that others who have rendered me devoted service should now be punished as instigators of the war . Nevertheless , the time has come to bear the unbearable . ... 
 I swallow my tears and give my sanction to the proposal to accept the Allied proclamation on the basis outlined by the Foreign Minister . 
 According to General <unk> Ikeda and Admiral <unk> Hoshina , Privy Council President Kiichirō Hiranuma then turned to the Emperor and asked him : " Your majesty , you also bear responsibility ( <unk> ) for this defeat . What apology are you going to make to the heroic spirits of the imperial founder of your house and your other imperial ancestors ? " 
 Once the Emperor had left , Suzuki pushed the cabinet to accept the Emperor 's will , which it did . Early that morning ( August 10 ) , the Foreign Ministry sent telegrams to the Allies ( by way of the Swiss Federal Political Department and Max <unk> in particular ) announcing that Japan would accept the Potsdam Declaration , but would not accept any peace conditions that would " prejudice the prerogatives " of the Emperor . That effectively meant no change in Japan 's form of government — that the Emperor of Japan would remain a position of real power . 
 = = = August 12 = = = 
 The Allied response was written by James F. Byrnes and approved by the British , Chinese , and Soviet governments , although the Soviets agreed only reluctantly . The Allies sent their response ( via the Swiss Political Affairs Department ) to Japan 's qualified acceptance of the Potsdam Declaration on August 12 . On the status of the Emperor it said : 
 From the moment of surrender the authority of the Emperor and the Japanese government to rule the state shall be subject to the Supreme Commander of the Allied powers who will take such steps as he deems proper to effectuate the surrender terms . ... The ultimate form of government of Japan shall , in accordance with the Potsdam Declaration , be established by the freely expressed will of the Japanese people . 
 President Truman ordered military operations ( including the B @-@ 29 bombings ) to continue until official word of Japanese surrender was received . However , news correspondents incorrectly interpreted a comment by Carl Andrew Spaatz that the B @-@ 29s were not flying on August 11 ( because of bad weather ) as a statement that a ceasefire was in effect . To avoid giving the Japanese the impression that the Allies had abandoned peace efforts and resumed bombing , Truman then ordered a halt to further bombings . 
 The Japanese cabinet considered the Allied response , and Suzuki argued that they must reject it and insist on an explicit guarantee for the imperial system . Anami returned to his position that there be no occupation of Japan . Afterward , Tōgō told Suzuki that there was no hope of getting better terms , and Kido conveyed the Emperor 's will that Japan surrender . In a meeting with the Emperor , Yonai spoke of his concerns about growing civil unrest : 
 I think the term is inappropriate , but the atomic bombs and the Soviet entry into the war are , in a sense , divine gifts . This way we don 't have to say that we have quit the war because of domestic circumstances . 
 That day , Hirohito informed the imperial family of his decision to surrender . One of his uncles , Prince Asaka , then asked whether the war would be continued if the kokutai ( imperial sovereignty ) could not be preserved . The Emperor simply replied " of course . " 
 = = = August 13 – 14 = = = 
 The Big Six and the cabinet spent August 13 debating their reply to the Allied response , but remained deadlocked . Meanwhile , the Allies grew doubtful , waiting for the Japanese to respond . The Japanese had been instructed that they could transmit an unqualified acceptance in the clear , but in fact they sent out coded messages on matters unrelated to the surrender parlay . The Allies took this coded response as non @-@ acceptance of the terms . 
 Via Ultra intercepts , the Allies also detected increased diplomatic and military traffic , which was taken as evidence that the Japanese were preparing an " all @-@ out banzai attack . " President Truman ordered a resumption of attacks against Japan at maximum intensity " so as to impress Japanese officials that we mean business and are serious in getting them to accept our peace proposals without delay . " The United States Third Fleet began shelling the Japanese coast . In the largest bombing raid of the Pacific War , more than 400 B @-@ 29s attacked Japan during daylight on August 14 , and more than 300 that night . A total of 1 @,@ 014 aircraft were used with no losses . 
 In the longest bombing mission of the war , B @-@ 29s from the 315 Bombardment Wing flew 6 @,@ 100 km ( 3 @,@ 800 mi ) to destroy the Nippon Oil Company refinery at <unk> on the northern tip of Honshū . This was the last operational refinery in the Japan Home Islands and it produced 67 % of their oil . After the war , the bombing raids were justified as already in progress when word of the Japanese surrender was received , but this is only partially true . 
 At the suggestion of American psychological operations experts , B @-@ 29s spent August 13 dropping leaflets over Japan , describing the Japanese offer of surrender and the Allied response . The leaflets had a profound effect on the Japanese decision @-@ making process . As August 14 dawned , Suzuki , Kido , and the Emperor realized the day would end with either an acceptance of the American terms or a military coup . 
 The Emperor met with the most senior Army and Navy officers . While several spoke in favor of fighting on , Field Marshal Shunroku Hata did not . As commander of the Second General Army , the headquarters of which had been in Hiroshima , Hata commanded all the troops defending southern Japan — the troops preparing to fight the " decisive battle " . Hata said he had no confidence in defeating the invasion and did not dispute the Emperor 's decision . The Emperor asked his military leaders to cooperate with him in ending the war . 
 At a conference with the cabinet and other councilors , Anami , Toyoda , and Umezu again made their case for continuing to fight , after which the Emperor said : 
 I have listened carefully to each of the arguments presented in opposition to the view that Japan should accept the Allied reply as it stands and without further clarification or modification , but my own thoughts have not undergone any change . ... In order that the people may know my decision , I request you to prepare at once an imperial rescript so that I may broadcast to the nation . Finally , I call upon each and every one of you to exert himself to the utmost so that we may meet the trying days which lie ahead . 
 The cabinet immediately convened and unanimously ratified the Emperor 's wishes . They also decided to destroy vast amounts of material pertaining to war crimes and the war responsibility of the nation 's highest leaders . Immediately after the conference , the Foreign ministry transmitted orders to its embassies in Switzerland and Sweden to accept the Allied terms of surrender . These orders were picked up and received in Washington at 02 : 49 , August 14 . 
 Difficulty with senior commanders on the distant war fronts was anticipated . Three princes of the Imperial Family who held military commissions were dispatched on August 14 to deliver the news personally . Prince Tsuneyoshi Takeda went to Korea and Manchuria , Prince Yasuhiko Asaka to the China Expeditionary Army and China Fleet , and Prince Kan 'in <unk> to Shanghai , South China , Indo @-@ China and Singapore . 
 The text of the Imperial Rescript on surrender was finalized by 19 : 00 August 14 , transcribed by the official court calligrapher , and brought to the cabinet for their signatures . Around 23 : 00 , the Emperor , with help from an NHK recording crew , made a gramophone record of himself reading it . The record was given to court chamberlain Yoshihiro Tokugawa , who hid it in a locker in the empress 's secretary 's office . 
 = = Attempted military coup d 'état ( August 12 – 15 ) = = 
 Late on the night of August 12 , 1945 , Major Kenji Hatanaka , along with Lieutenant Colonels Masataka Ida , Masahiko Takeshita ( Anami 's brother @-@ in @-@ law ) , and Inaba Masao , and Colonel <unk> Arao , the Chief of the Military Affairs Section , spoke to War Minister Korechika Anami ( the army minister and " most powerful figure in Japan besides the Emperor himself " ) , and asked him to do whatever he could to prevent acceptance of the Potsdam Declaration . General Anami refused to say whether he would help the young officers in treason . As much as they needed his support , Hatanaka and the other rebels decided they had no choice but to continue planning and to attempt a coup d 'état on their own . Hatanaka spent much of August 13 and the morning of August 14 gathering allies , seeking support from the higher @-@ ups in the Ministry , and perfecting his plot . 
 Shortly after the conference on the night of August 13 – 14 at which the surrender finally was decided , a group of senior army officers including Anami gathered in a nearby room . All those present were concerned about the possibility of a coup d 'état to prevent the surrender — some of those present may have even been considering launching one . After a silence , General Torashirō Kawabe proposed that all senior officers present sign an agreement to carry out the Emperor 's order of surrender — " The Army will act in accordance with the Imperial Decision to the last . " It was signed by all the high @-@ ranking officers present , including Anami , Hajime Sugiyama , <unk> Umezu , Kenji <unk> , Torashirō Kawabe , Masakazu Kawabe , and <unk> Wakamatsu . " This written accord by the most senior officers in the Army ... acted as a formidable firebreak against any attempt to incite a coup d 'état in Tokyo . " 
 Around 21 : 30 on August 14 , Hatanaka 's rebels set their plan into motion . The Second Regiment of the First Imperial Guards had entered the palace grounds , doubling the strength of the battalion already stationed there , presumably to provide extra protection against Hatanaka 's rebellion . But Hatanaka , along with Lt. Col. Jirō Shiizaki , convinced the commander of the 2nd Regiment of the First Imperial Guards , Colonel <unk> Haga , of their cause , by telling him ( falsely ) that Generals Anami and Umezu , and the commanders of the Eastern District Army and Imperial Guards Divisions were all in on the plan . Hatanaka also went to the office of <unk> Tanaka , commander of the Eastern region of the army , to try to persuade him to join the coup . Tanaka refused , and ordered Hatanaka to go home . Hatanaka ignored the order . 
 Originally , Hatanaka hoped that simply occupying the palace and showing the beginnings of a rebellion would inspire the rest of the Army to rise up against the move to surrender . This notion guided him through much of the last days and hours and gave him the blind optimism to move ahead with the plan , despite having little support from his superiors . Having set all the pieces into position , Hatanaka and his co @-@ conspirators decided that the Guard would take over the palace at 02 : 00 . The hours until then were spent in continued attempts to convince their superiors in the Army to join the coup . At about the same time , General Anami committed seppuku , leaving a message that , " I — with my death — humbly apologize to the Emperor for the great crime . " Whether the crime involved losing the war , or the coup , remains unclear . 
 At some time after 01 : 00 , Hatanaka and his men surrounded the palace . Hatanaka , Shiizaki and Captain <unk> Uehara ( of the Air Force Academy ) went to the office of Lt. General Takeshi Mori to ask him to join the coup . Mori was in a meeting with his brother @-@ in @-@ law , <unk> Shiraishi . The cooperation of Mori , as commander of the 1st Imperial Guards Division , was crucial . When Mori refused to side with Hatanaka , Hatanaka killed him , fearing Mori would order the Guards to stop the rebellion . Uehara killed Shiraishi . These were the only two murders of the night . Hatanaka then used General Mori 's official stamp to authorize Imperial Guards Division Strategic Order No. 584 , a false set of orders created by his co @-@ conspirators , which would greatly increase the strength of the forces occupying the Imperial Palace and Imperial Household Ministry , and " protecting " the Emperor . 
 The palace police were disarmed and all the entrances blocked . Over the course of the night , Hatanaka 's rebels captured and detained eighteen people , including Ministry staff and NHK workers sent to record the surrender speech . 
 The rebels , led by Hatanaka , spent the next several hours fruitlessly searching for Imperial House Minister <unk> Ishiwatari , Lord of the Privy Seal Kōichi Kido , and the recordings of the surrender speech . The two men were hiding in the " bank vault " , a large chamber underneath the Imperial Palace . The search was made more difficult by a blackout in response to Allied bombings , and by the archaic organization and layout of the Imperial House Ministry . Many of the names of the rooms were unrecognizable to the rebels . The rebels did find the chamberlain Tokugawa . Although Hatanaka threatened to disembowel him with a samurai sword , Tokugawa lied and told them he did not know where the recordings or men were . During their search , the rebels cut nearly all of the telephone wires , severing communications between the palace grounds and the outside world . 
 At about the same time , another group of Hatanaka 's rebels led by Captain Takeo Sasaki went to Prime Minister Suzuki 's office , intent on killing him . When they found it empty , they machine @-@ gunned the office and set the building on fire , then left for his home . <unk> <unk> had warned Suzuki , and he escaped minutes before the would @-@ be assassins arrived . After setting fire to Suzuki 's home , they went to the estate of Kiichirō Hiranuma to assassinate him . Hiranuma escaped through a side gate and the rebels burned his house as well . Suzuki spent the rest of August under police protection , spending each night in a different bed . 
 Around 03 : 00 , Hatanaka was informed by Lieutenant Colonel Masataka Ida that the Eastern District Army was on its way to the palace to stop him , and that he should give up . Finally , seeing his plan collapsing around him , Hatanaka pleaded with Tatsuhiko Takashima , Chief of Staff of the Eastern District Army , to be given at least ten minutes on the air on NHK radio , to explain to the people of Japan what he was trying to accomplish and why . He was refused . Colonel Haga , commander of the 2nd Regiment of the First Imperial Guards , discovered that the Army did not support this rebellion , and he ordered Hatanaka to leave the palace grounds . 
 Just before 05 : 00 , as his rebels continued their search , Major Hatanaka went to the NHK studios , and , brandishing a pistol , tried desperately to get some airtime to explain his actions . A little over an hour later , after receiving a telephone call from the Eastern District Army , Hatanaka finally gave up . He gathered his officers and walked out of the NHK studio . 
 At dawn , Tanaka learned that the palace had been invaded . He went there and confronted the rebellious officers , berating them for acting contrary to the spirit of the Japanese army . He convinced them to return to their barracks . By 08 : 00 , the rebellion was entirely dismantled , having succeeded in holding the palace grounds for much of the night but failing to find the recordings . 
 Hatanaka , on a motorcycle , and Shiizaki , on horseback , rode through the streets , tossing leaflets that explained their motives and their actions . Within an hour before the Emperor 's broadcast , sometime around 11 : 00 , August 15 , Hatanaka placed his pistol to his forehead , and shot himself . Shiizaki stabbed himself with a dagger , and then shot himself . In Hatanaka 's pocket was found his death poem : " I have nothing to regret now that the dark clouds have disappeared from the reign of the Emperor . " 
 = = Surrender = = 
 = = = Broadcast of the Imperial Rescript on surrender = = = 
 At 12 : 00 noon Japan standard time on August 15 , the Emperor 's recorded speech to the nation , reading the Imperial Rescript on the Termination of the War , was broadcast : 
 After pondering deeply the general trends of the world and the actual conditions obtaining in Our Empire today , We have decided to effect a settlement of the present situation by resorting to an extraordinary measure . 
 We have ordered Our Government to communicate to the Governments of the United States , Great Britain , China and the Soviet Union that Our Empire accepts the provisions of their Joint Declaration . 
 To strive for the common prosperity and happiness of all nations as well as the security and well @-@ being of Our subjects is the solemn obligation which has been handed down by Our Imperial Ancestors and which lies close to Our heart . 
 Indeed , We declared war on America and Britain out of Our sincere desire to ensure Japan 's self @-@ preservation and the stabilization of East Asia , it being far from Our thought either to infringe upon the sovereignty of other nations or to embark upon territorial aggrandizement . 
 But now the war has lasted for nearly four years . Despite the best that has been done by everyone — the gallant fighting of the military and naval forces , the diligence and assiduity of Our servants of the State , and the devoted service of Our one hundred million people — the war situation has developed not necessarily to Japan 's advantage , while the general trends of the world have all turned against her interest . 
 Moreover , the enemy has begun to employ a new and most cruel bomb , the power of which to do damage is , indeed , incalculable , taking the toll of many innocent lives . Should we continue to fight , not only would it result in an ultimate collapse and obliteration of the Japanese nation , but also it would lead to the total extinction of human civilization . 
 Such being the case , how are We to save the millions of Our subjects , or to atone Ourselves before the hallowed spirits of Our Imperial Ancestors ? This is the reason why We have ordered the acceptance of the provisions of the Joint Declaration of the Powers .... 
 The hardships and sufferings to which Our nation is to be subjected hereafter will be certainly great . We are keenly aware of the inmost feelings of all of you , Our subjects . However , it is according to the dictates of time and fate that We have resolved to pave the way for a grand peace for all the generations to come by enduring the unendurable and suffering what is <unk> . 
 The low quality of the recording , combined with the Classical Japanese language used by the Emperor in the Rescript , made the recording very difficult to understand for most listeners . This speech marked the end of imperial Japan 's ultranationalist ideology , and was a major turning point in Japanese history . 
 Public reaction to the Emperor 's speech varied – many Japanese simply listened to it , then went on with their lives as best they could , while some Army and Navy officers chose suicide over surrender . At a base north of Nagasaki , some Japanese Army officers , enraged at the prospect of surrender , pulled some 16 captured American airmen out of the base prison and hacked them to death with swords . A large , weeping crowd gathered in front of the Imperial Palace in Tokyo , with their cries sometimes interrupted by the sound of gunshots as military officers present committed suicide . 
 On August 17 , Suzuki was replaced as prime minister by the Emperor 's uncle , Prince Higashikuni , perhaps to forestall any further coup or assassination attempts ; Mamoru Shigemitsu replaced Tōgō as foreign minister . 
 Japan 's forces were still fighting against the Soviets as well as the Chinese , and managing their cease @-@ fire and surrender was difficult . The last air combat by Japanese fighters against American reconnaissance bombers took place on August 18 . The Soviet Union continued to fight until early September , taking the Kuril Islands . 
 = = = Beginning of occupation and the surrender ceremony = = = 
 Allied civilians and servicemen alike rejoiced at the news of the end of the war . A photograph , V – J day in Times Square , of an American sailor kissing a woman in New York , and a news film of the Dancing Man in Sydney have come to epitomize the immediate celebrations . August 14 and 15 are celebrated as Victory over Japan Day in many Allied countries . 
 The Soviet Union had some intentions of occupying Hokkaidō . Unlike the Soviet occupations of East Germany and North Korea , however , these plans were frustrated by the opposition of President Truman . 
 Japanese officials left for Manila on August 19 to meet Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers Douglas MacArthur , and to be briefed on his plans for the occupation . On August 28 , 150 U.S. personnel flew to Atsugi , Kanagawa Prefecture , and the occupation of Japan began . They were followed by USS Missouri , whose accompanying vessels landed the 4th Marines on the southern coast of Kanagawa . Other Allied personnel followed . 
 MacArthur arrived in Tokyo on August 30 , and immediately decreed several laws : No Allied personnel were to assault Japanese people . No Allied personnel were to eat the scarce Japanese food . Flying the Hinomaru or " Rising Sun " flag was severely restricted . 
 The formal surrender occurred on September 2 , 1945 around 9 a.m. Tokyo time , when representatives from the Empire of Japan signed the Japanese Instrument of Surrender in Tokyo Bay aboard the USS Missouri . Japanese Foreign Minister Shigemitsu signed for the Japanese government , while Gen. Umezu signed for the Japanese armed forces . 
 On the Missouri that day was the American flag flown in 1853 on the USS Powhatan by Commodore Matthew C. Perry on the first of his two expeditions to Japan . Perry 's expeditions had resulted in the Convention of Kanagawa , which forced the Japanese to open the country to American trade . 
 After the formal surrender on September 2 aboard the Missouri , investigations into Japanese war crimes began quickly . At a meeting with General MacArthur later in September , Emperor Hirohito offered to take blame for the war crimes , but his offer was rejected , and he was never tried . Legal procedures for the International Military Tribunal for the Far East were issued on January 19 , 1946 . 
 In addition to August 14 and 15 , September 2 , 1945 is also known as V @-@ J Day . President Truman declared September 2 to be V @-@ J Day , but noted that " It is not yet the day for the formal proclamation of the end of the war nor of the cessation of hostilities . " In Japan , August 15 is often called <unk> @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) , which literally means the " memorial day for the end of the war , " but the government 's name for the day ( which is not a national holiday ) is <unk> o <unk> shi <unk> o <unk> <unk> hi ( <unk> , " day for mourning of war dead and praying for peace " ) . 
 = = Further surrenders and continued Japanese military resistance = = 
 Following the signing of the instrument of surrender , many further surrender ceremonies took place across Japan 's remaining holdings in the Pacific . Japanese forces in South East Asia surrendered on September 12 , 1945 in Singapore . Taiwan 's <unk> Day ( October 25 ) , marked the end of Japanese rule of Taiwan and the subsequent rule by the Republic Of China government . It was not until 1947 that all prisoners held by America and Britain were repatriated . As late as April 1949 , China still held more than 60 @,@ 000 Japanese prisoners . Some , such as <unk> Tominaga , were not repatriated until the late 1950s . 
 The logistical demands of the surrender were formidable . After Japan 's capitulation , more than 5 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 Japanese soldiers and 1 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 Japanese sailors were taken prisoner by the Allies . The damage done to Japan 's infrastructure , combined with a severe famine in 1946 , further complicated the Allied efforts to feed the Japanese POWs and civilians . 
 The state of war between the United States and Japan officially ended when the Treaty of San Francisco took effect on April 28 , 1952 . Japan and the Soviet Union formally made peace four years later , when they signed the Soviet – Japanese Joint Declaration of 1956 . 
 Some Japanese holdouts , especially on small Pacific Islands , refused to surrender at all ( believing the declaration to be propaganda or considering surrender against their code ) . Some may never have heard of it . Teruo Nakamura , the last known holdout , emerged from his hidden retreat in Indonesia in December 1974 , while two other Japanese soldiers , who had joined Communist guerrillas at the end of the war , fought in southern Thailand until 1991 . 
 = = = Texts = = = 
 = Amanita rubrovolvata = 
 Amanita rubrovolvata , commonly known as the red volva Amanita , is a species of fungus in the Amanitaceae family . First described scientifically by the Japanese mycologist S. Imai in 1939 , it is widely distributed in eastern Asia . The fungus produces small- to medium @-@ sized mushrooms , with reddish @-@ orange caps up to 6 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 26 in ) wide . The stems are up to 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) tall , cream above the ring and cream to yellowish below it . The stem ends in a roughly spherical bulb at the base , which is covered with bright orange patches . Neither edibility nor toxicity have been established for the fungus , but it is suspected to be associated with neurological anomalies . Several molecular studies have confirmed the mushroom 's classification in the subgenus Amanita of the genus Amanita , along with closely related species such as A. muscaria . 
 = = Taxonomy , phylogeny , and naming = = 
 The species was first described scientifically by the Japanese mycologist Sanshi Imai in 1939 , based on various collections made in Japan during 1933 – 38 . Imai designated the Japanese name for mushroom as Hime @-@ beni @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) . According to the online taxonomical database MycoBank , the name <unk> rubrovolvata , proposed by French mycologist Jean @-@ Edouard Gilbert in 1941 , is a synonym ; the generic name <unk> has since been subsumed into Amanita . 
 Amanita rubrovolvata is classified in the subgenus Amanita of the genus Amanita , according to the systems proposed by Cornelis Bas ( 1969 ) , and Rolf Singer ( 1986 ) . It was one of 49 Amanita species included in a 1998 molecular phylogenetic analysis intended to help clarify natural groups and phylogenetic relationships within the genus . In the cladogram , A. rubrovolvata is on a branch next to a cluster of species including A. pantherina var. lutea , A. gemmata , A. farinosa , and A. sinensis . These results were comparable to those published in later phylogenetic analyses ( 1999 , 2004 , 2010 ) that have included A. <unk> as part of a larger dataset . 
 The specific epithet rubrovolvata is derived from the Latin words ruber ( " red " ) , and the adjective volvatus ( " closely sheathed " ) . Amanita authority Rodham E. Tulloss has suggested " red volva Amanita " as an appropriate common name . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of A. rubrovolvata is 2 – 6 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 08 – 0 @.@ 26 in ) wide , convex to flattened , sometimes with a slight umbo . They are dark red to reddish @-@ orange , becoming a paler orange to yellowish at the margin . The cap surface is densely covered with red to orange to yellow , powdery to granular remnants of the volva . The cap margin is grooved — with the grooves extending to between 30 % to 60 % of the radius — and does not have partial veil remnants hanging along the cap margin . The flesh of the mushroom is white to yellow , or reddish immediately beneath the cap cuticle . The white gills are free from attachment to the stem and are 3 to 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 12 to 0 @.@ 24 in ) broad . The lamellulae ( short gills that do not extend fully from the cap edge to the stem ) are truncate , and typically range in length between 15 – 50 % of the length of the gills . 
 The stem is 50 – 100 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) by 5 – 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 4 in ) thick , roughly cylindrical or slightly larger upwards , with a surface that is cream above the ring and cream to yellowish below . The bulb at the base of the stem is roughly spherical , and 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) wide , with its upper part covered with red , orange to yellow woolly to powdery remnants of the volva . The volva remains in mature specimens as a ring around the upper part of the stem bulb . The ring is membranous , persistent , with an upper surface that is white and a lower surface having a yellowish tinge and an edge that is red to orange . 
 Amanita rubrovolvata produces a white to cream @-@ colored spore print . The spores are spherical or nearly so , and typically measure 7 @.@ 5 – 9 @.@ 0 by 7 @.@ 0 – 8 @.@ 5 µm . They are inamyloid , meaning that they will not absorb iodine stain from Melzer 's reagent . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells in the hymenium ) are club @-@ shaped , four @-@ spored ( rarely two @-@ spored ) , and measure 25 – 44 by 10 – 14 µm . The sterigmata ( slender extensions at the basidial tips that attach to the spores ) are 3 – 4 µm long , and clamps are not found on the bases of basidia . 
 Although the edibility or toxicity of the mushroom is not known with certainty , it has been reported to cause " neurological symptoms " in mice , as well as increased levels of blood glucose and decreased blood urea nitrogen . Other biochemical changes reported in mice , after peritoneal injection of fruit body extract , include decreases in the activity of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase and reduced levels of liver glycogen . In these experiments , values returned to normal six hours after initial injection , suggesting that the poisoning was not serious , and did not affect liver and kidney performance . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 <unk> and colleagues mention that the eastern North American species A. <unk> resembles A. <unk> slightly , but the former has short grooves at the edge of a yellowish @-@ orange cap , slightly larger spores , a yellow volva , and clamps at the basidial bases . Roger Heim reported A. <unk> as occurring in Thailand , but this was probably a misidentification of A. rubrovolvata . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Amanita <unk> mushrooms grow in groups on the ground . Amanita species form mycorrhizal relationships with trees . This is a mutually beneficial relationship where the hyphae of the fungus grow around the roots of trees , enabling the fungus to receive moisture , protection and nutritive byproducts of the tree , and affording the tree greater access to soil nutrients . The original Japanese collections were made in forests dominated by Japanese beech ( Fagus crenata ) , but it has also been found growing near Quercus <unk> , Rhododendron <unk> , and Myrica esculenta in India , in Castanopsis @-@ <unk> forest in Nepal , and in Castanopsis indica plantations in the Himalayas . 
 The species occurs in China , northern India , Nepal , <unk> Himalaya , South Korea , and countries of Southeast Asia ( for example , Thailand ) . The southern limit of the distribution extends to southern Malay Peninsula . 
 = New Year 's Revolution ( 2007 ) = 
 New Year 's Revolution ( 2007 ) was the third annual and final New Year 's Revolution professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . It took place on January 7 , 2007 , at Kemper Arena in Kansas City , Missouri and featured wrestlers and other talent from WWE 's Raw brand . There were seven professional wrestling matches scheduled on the event 's card . 
 Four championships exclusive to the Raw brand were contested for ; none was lost as all four championships were retained . The main event was a standard wrestling match , in which WWE Champion John Cena defeated challenger Umaga to retain his championship . Two predominant bouts were featured on the undercard . The first was a Tag team match , in which World Tag Team Champions Rated @-@ RKO ( Edge and Randy Orton ) fought D @-@ Generation X ( Triple H and Shawn Michaels ) to a no @-@ contest . Due to WWE rules , a title can only change hands via pinfall or submission , as a result , Rated @-@ RKO retained their titles . Another main match was a steel cage match , a match fought within a cage formed by placing four sheets of mesh metal around , in , or against the edges of the wrestling ring . WWE Intercontinental Champion Jeff Hardy defeated Johnny Nitro to retain his championship . 
 The event received 220 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , which was less than the 294 @,@ 000 buys the previous year 's event received . The event was rated a six out of ten . When the event was released on DVD , it reached a peak position of fourth on Billboard 's DVD sales chart for recreational sports . It remained on the chart for six consecutive weeks . 
 = = Background = = 
 Seven professional wrestling matches were featured on the event 's card , which were planned with predetermined outcomes by WWE 's script writers . The buildup to these matches and scenarios that took place before , during and after the event were also planned by WWE 's script writers . The event featured wrestlers and other talent from WWE 's Raw brand , a storyline expansion in which WWE assigned its employees . Wrestlers portrayed either a villain or fan favorite gimmick , an on @-@ screen character , for the entertainment of the audience . 
 The main rivalry heading into New Year 's Revolution was between John Cena and Umaga over the WWE Championship . The rivalry all began on the November 6 episode of Raw , one of WWE 's main television programs , when Cena interfered in Umaga 's match while accepting a challenge to a match by Kevin Federline . One week later , Jonathan Coachman , an on @-@ screen authority figure of Raw , a portrayed match maker and rules enforcer , announced that a match between Cena and Umaga would take place , which ended in a no @-@ contest due to interference . Three weeks later on the November 27 edition of Raw , Umaga ( through Armando Alejandro Estrada ) issued a challenge to Cena for the WWE Championship , which Cena accepted . The following week , Cena was assaulted by Umaga after his match , and both were confronted by security . Afterwards , neither of them could touch each other outside of a match until New Year 's Revolution . On the December 18 edition of Raw , Cena , along with D @-@ Generation X , ( Triple H and Shawn Michaels ) faced off against Umaga and Rated @-@ RKO ( Edge and Randy Orton ) . The match ended in a no @-@ contest after Cena and Umaga started brawling to the backstage area . Two weeks later on the January 1 edition of Raw , Cena faced off against Federline in a No Disqualification match , a match where there is no rules and the only way to win is by pinfall or submission . During the match , Umaga came to the ring and hit Cena with the WWE championship belt , which allowed Federline to pin Cena for the win . This led to a 4 @-@ on @-@ 1 handicap match later that night between Johnny Nitro , Johnathan Coachman , Umaga , and Estrada and Cena , where Cena attacked Umaga with a folding chair , causing the disqualification . 
 Another rivalry leading up to the event was between Johnny Nitro and Jeff Hardy . In September 2006 , Hardy challenged Nitro numerous times for the WWE Intercontinental Championship , but failed to win it due to repeated interference by Melina ( Melina Perez ) ( Nitro 's then @-@ girlfriend ) . Hardy finally defeated Nitro to win the title on the October 2 edition of Raw . On the November 6 edition of Raw , Eric Bischoff , the Raw authority figure for the night , scheduled a match between Hardy and Nitro for the title . In the match , Melina interfered and caused Nitro to get disqualified . Due to WWE rules , a title can only change hands via pinfall or submission , as a result , Hardy retained his title . Bischoff then scheduled a No Disqualification match , which Nitro won after interference from Melina . The following week , Hardy and Nitro were scheduled in a Ladder match , a match where the contestant that climbs a ladder and retrieves an item ( usually a title belt ) hung above the ring is the winner . Hardy won the match and the title . On the November 27 episode of Raw , Nitro and his former tag team partner Joey Mercury , as MNM , accepted The Hardys open challenge for WWE 's December pay @-@ per @-@ view , December to Dismember , which the Hardys came out victorious . The Hardys won the match . At Armageddon another one of WWE 's December pay @-@ per @-@ views , MNM and The Hardys competed in a Four team Ladder match also involving Dave Taylor and William Regal and WWE Tag Team Champions Paul London and Brian Kendrick . London and Kendrick won the match and retained their titles . During the match , Mercury legitimately broke his nose when he was struck in the face with a ladder , when Jeff jumped off the top rope . On the December 18 edition of Raw , Nitro challenged Hardy to a Steel Cage match , a match fought within a cage formed by placing four sheets of mesh metal around , in , or against the edges of the wrestling ring , for the Intercontinental Championship , which Hardy accepted . The match then was scheduled for New Year 's Revolution . 
 The rivalry between Rated @-@ RKO ( Edge and Randy Orton ) and D @-@ Generation X ( DX ; Triple H and Shawn Michaels ) began on the October 9 edition of Raw . Edge and Orton both had problems with DX in the past and formed an alliance against them , and challenged DX to a match at Cyber Sunday , WWE 's only pay @-@ per @-@ view where people can go online and votes for different aspects of a match . Rated @-@ RKO defeated DX , after Eric Bischoff , the referee of the match , let Orton use a folding chair , which led Rated @-@ RKO to victory . For consecutive weeks , Triple H and Orton competed in singles matches . On the December 11 edition of Raw , Flair assisted DX in an ambush by Rated @-@ RKO and Kenny , and Coachman came out to announce a Six @-@ man tag team match , where DX and Flair again emerged victorious . DX would challenge Rated @-@ RKO for the World Tag Team Championships at New Year 's Revolution . 
 The feud between Ric Flair and Kenny Dykstra ( originally just Kenny ) stemmed from Flair 's feud with the Spirit Squad , which Dykstra was a part of . On the October 23 edition of Raw , Dykstra was angered by his teammates ' recent losing streak against Flair , and he proved himself by defeating Flair that night in a singles match . Two weeks after defeating the Spirit Squad for the World Tag Team Championship , Flair and Roddy Piper lost their title to Rated @-@ RKO . The legitimate reason behind their title loss was that Piper was diagnosed with cancer and had to immediately leave the show . Flair , however , continued to feud with the Spirit Squad , defeating them all at Survivor Series with his team of WWE legends . On the November 27 edition of Raw , Flair teamed up with DX to take on the Spirit Squad in a 3 @-@ on @-@ 5 handicap match . Flair and DX won , and DX packed them all in a crate ( excluding Dykstra ) and kayfabe sent them to Ohio Valley Wrestling . It was announced that Flair would face Dykstra at New Year 's Revolution . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event went live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , Vladimir Kozlov defeated Eugene in a dark match . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match that aired was for the WWE Intercontinental Championship in a Steel cage match , a match fought within a cage formed by placing four sheets of mesh metal around , in , or against the edges of the wrestling ring . Jeff Hardy was defending the title against Johnny Nitro . The match included various high @-@ flying moves like top @-@ rope kicks and <unk> off the top of the cage . Near the end of the match , Hardy pulled Nitro from the top of the cage and nearly scored a pinfall after a Swanton Bomb , but Nitro put his foot on the bottom rope . Nitro then made it over the cage , but just as Nitro was about to jump , Hardy dropkicked the door open , and Nitro fell onto the top of the door , paining him between his legs . As Nitro was on top of the door , Hardy kicked the cage door , and walked out the door to win the match and retain his Intercontinental Championship . 
 The next match was for a future World Tag Team Championship in a Tag Team Turmoil match , a match where two tag teams start out and when a team was defeated , another came out until the match ended . The match began with the teams of The World 's Greatest Tag Team ( Shelton Benjamin and Charlie Haas ) and The Highlanders ( Robbie and Rory McAllister ) . The first elimination was made when Benjamin pinned Robbie after a superplex . The World 's Greatest Tag Team , defeated the second tag team Jim Duggan and Super Crazy . The third team , Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch defeated The World 's Greatest Tag Team after Cade performed a diving elbow drop on Haas and scored the pinfall . The final team , Cryme Tyme ( Shad Gaspard and JTG ) , won the match after performing a <unk> and pinning Cade to become the top contenders to the World Tag Team Championship , though they never received their championship match . 
 After the match , Jonathan Coachman and Vince McMahon were backstage discussing the personal feud between Donald Trump and Rosie O 'Donnell . McMahon announced a match between the two the next night on Raw . The third contest was between Kenny Dykstra and Ric Flair . The end of the match saw Dykstra executing an illegal low blow , when the referee was not paying attention and rolled Flair up with a small package to secure the pinfall . 
 The next match was between Mickie James and Victoria . Melina ( who accompanied Victoria down to the ring ) , interfered in the match , but failed to following interference by Candice Michelle and Maria . James then did a Mickie DDT and pinned Victoria to retain her title . 
 Next was the World Tag Team Championship match between the defending champions Rated @-@ RKO and D @-@ Generation X ( DX ) . During the match , Triple H did a spinebuster on Orton and injured his right leg . The match ended when Michaels hit the referee and then assaulted Rated @-@ RKO with a chair . DX used steel chairs to beat down Rated @-@ RKO . After the match , DX brutalized Rated @-@ RKO and left them a bloody mess on the announcers ' tables . Triple H gave Edge a Pedigree on the announce table , and Shawn Michaels did the diving elbow drop on Randy Orton through the Spanish announce table . 
 The sixth contest was between Carlito and Chris Masters . The match came to an end when Carlito reversed the Masterlock attempt by Masters , however Masters fell on Carlito and performed a pin to successfully score the pinfall . 
 = = = Main event match = = = 
 Next was the main event , which saw John Cena defend the WWE Championship against Umaga . During the match , Cena attempted and failed to perform the FU various times . Cena would keep attacking Umaga by throwing Umaga 's head into the steel ring post , which was followed up by a Five Knuckle Shuffle . When Cena failed to execute a FU , Umaga would take control . Umaga charged at Cena , who was positioned in a corner , but Cena would put his feet up to superkick Umaga in the face . This move allowed Cena to quickly roll @-@ up Umaga for the win . Cena had ended Umaga 's undefeated streak and retained his WWE Championship . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The feud between John Cena and Umaga continued on Raw the next night , where Umaga assaulted Cena after his match with The Great Khali and also interfered in Cena 's match with Jonathan Coachman two weeks later . Due to the Umaga assault , Cena injured his spleen , which was portrayed as real in their storyline . At Royal Rumble , a Last Man Standing match , a match where the only way to win is to beat up your opponent so much they can not get to their feet before the referee counts to ten was scheduled for the WWE Championship between Cena and Umaga . Cena won the match and retained his title , ending their rivalry . 
 It was announced that Triple H was injured with a ruptured quadriceps tendon and he did not compete on WWE television for over seven months . Shawn Michaels however , continued his feud with Rated @-@ RKO by teaming up with Cena and defeating them for their World Tag Team Championship on the post @-@ Royal Rumble episode of Raw . The feud ended shortly afterwards as Rated @-@ RKO disbanded after their own rivalry began . A Triple Threat match , a standard match involving three wrestlers was made between Edge , Orton , and Michaels . Michaels won the match to become the number one contender to the WWE Championship at WrestleMania 23 . Michaels then feuded with Cena , which would end at Backlash , when Cena defeated Edge , Orton and Michaels in a Fatal Four Way match , a standard wrestling match involving four wrestlers to retain his WWE Championship . 
 Jeff Hardy and Johnny Nitro continued to feud as members of The Hardys and MNM respectively , until their rematch at the Royal Rumble , where the Hardys were victorious . The feud then began to fade , as Joey Mercury was released from his contract , and The Hardys began to establish their single careers , participating in the Money in the Bank ladder match at WrestleMania 23 . 
 The feud between Kenny Dykstra and Ric Flair continued . As a reward for defeating Flair at New Year 's Revolution , Coachman booked Dykstra in a match with Hardy for his WWE Intercontinental Championship . Flair interfered and performed a low blow to Dykstra , allowing Hardy to win . On the following Raw , Flair defeated Dykstra in a rematch , ending their rivalry . The feuds between Carlito and Chris Masters , and Mickie James and Victoria also ended after Carlito and James won subsequent rematches , and they began to feud with Ric Flair and Melina respectively . The match between Donald Trump and Rosie O 'Donnell was actually a parody match , with talent from WWE 's developmental territories portraying the characters . This was the early stage of a major feud between Donald Trump and Vince McMahon , which would go on to WrestleMania . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Kemper Arena has a maximum capacity of 18 @,@ 344 , but that was reduced for New Year ' Revolution ( 2007 ) . The maximum attendance that was allowed was 10 @,@ 000 . The event received 220 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , which was less than the 294 @,@ 000 buys the previous year 's event received . The promotion 's revenue was $ 107 @.@ 4 million , which was greater than the previous year 's revenue of $ 95 @.@ 1 . Canadian Online Explorer rated the overall event , as well as the main event , a six out of ten . None of the matches received a rating higher than a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 . The match between Mickie James and Victoria was rated a three out of 10 , the lowest overall . 
 The event was released on DVD on February 6 , 2007 . The DVD reached a peak position of eleventh on Billboard 's DVD sales chart for recreational sports on February 24 , 2007 . It remained on the chart for six consecutive weeks , until April 7 , when it ranked twelfth . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Tag Team Turmoil match = = = 
 = Death of Linda Norgrove = 
 On 26 September 2010 , Scottish aid worker Linda Norgrove and three Afghan colleagues were kidnapped by members of the Taliban in the Kunar Province of eastern Afghanistan . At the time , she was working in the country as regional director for Development Alternatives Incorporated , a contractor for U.S. and other government agencies . After their capture , the group was taken to the nearby <unk> Valley area . United States and Afghan forces began a search of the area , placing roadblocks to prevent the group from being moved east into Pakistan . 
 Norgrove 's captors demanded the release of Aafia Siddiqui in exchange for her return . During negotiations , on 3 October 2010 the Taliban released the three Afghans . Five days later , amid concerns that Norgrove would be killed or moved by her kidnappers , the United States Naval Special Warfare Development Group conducted a predawn rescue attempt on the Taliban mountain hideout where she was held captive . US forces killed several kidnappers and three local farmers in the assault . They subsequently located Norgrove , badly wounded , in a nearby gully ; she later died from her injuries . 
 Initial reports said that Norgrove had been killed by an explosion set off by one of her captors . However , a joint official investigation by the United Kingdom and the United States concluded that Norgrove 's fatal injuries were inflicted by a grenade thrown by one of her rescuers . A February 2011 coroner 's narrative verdict reported that Norgrove died during the failed rescue attempt . In October 2012 , one of Norgrove 's colleagues said in an interview that the captors told Norgrove they had no intention of killing her . 
 = = Early life , education and work = = 
 Norgrove was born in <unk> , Scotland , in 1974 to John and Lorna Norgrove . She grew up on a croft on the Isle of Lewis in the Western Isles , attending a primary school in Uig . She later attended the Nicolson Institute in Stornoway . Norgrove attended the University of Aberdeen , receiving a first @-@ class honours degree in tropical environmental science ; her coursework included postgraduate research at the University of Chiapas in Mexico and a year of study at the University of Oregon ( 1993 – 94 ) . She attended the University of London , receiving a master 's degree with distinction in rural resources and environmental policy in 1997 . 
 In 2002 , Norgrove received a Ph.D. from the University of Manchester in development policy and management . From 2002 to 2005 she worked for the World Wide Fund in Peru , supporting ( and later supervising ) the WWF 's Forest Program in the Peruvian Andes . At the time of her death , Norgrove was working towards an MBA from the University of Warwick through distance learning in addition to her aid work . She worked in Afghanistan ( for the United Nations from 2005 to 2008 and as regional director of an international development company based in Jalalabad beginning in February 2010 ) , Laos ( as an environmental specialist for the U.N. in 2008 – 09 ) , Mexico and Uganda ( where Norgrove researched the effects of national park management on the indigenous population near Mount <unk> National Park ) . 
 = = Kidnapping = = 
 On 26 September 2010 , Norgrove and three Afghan colleagues were travelling in the <unk> District ( also known as <unk> and <unk> ) of eastern Kunar Province when they were kidnapped by local insurgents . They were ambushed whilst driving on the main highway from Jalalabad to Asadabad , in the <unk> valley , in two unarmored , unmarked Toyota <unk> . A U.S. military convoy was ambushed two months earlier on the same stretch of road . Norgrove wore a burqa to disguise her foreign appearance . 
 Dressed in men 's clothing by her captors , she was first taken into the mountains and then brought to the <unk> Valley in <unk> District ( which crosses the Korengal Valley ) . U.S. Army troops from Bravo Company , 2 / 327 Infantry , 1st Brigade Combat Team , 101st Airborne Division began a 12 @-@ day search supported by Afghan army , police and commando units under the codename " Enterprise " . A house @-@ to @-@ house search was conducted and roadblocks posted at the valley entrance to prevent Norgrove 's captors from transferring her eastward into Pakistan . The difficult terrain ( with few roads ) complicated and slowed the process ; however , the search efforts succeeded in containing the kidnappers in the vicinity and several local Taliban members were killed . 
 = = = Negotiations = = = 
 It was unclear at first who kidnapped Norgrove and her colleagues . A Taliban commander , the Pakistan @-@ based Mohammed Osman , was reported to demand the release of Aafia Siddiqui in return for Norgrove 's freedom . Siddiqui , known as " Lady al @-@ Qaeda " , had received an 86 @-@ year prison sentence in the U.S. on 26 September . " We are lucky that we abducted this British woman soon after the ruthless ruling by an American court on Aafia Siddiqui . We will demand the release of Aafia Siddiqui in exchange for her " , said Osman . 
 However , other Afghan sources denied any link to Osman . U.S. military sources identified Norgrove 's captors as Kunar Taliban , and British Foreign Secretary William Hague said they were from a Salafist group affiliated with the local Taliban , known as Jamaat al Dawa al Quran . An Afghan intelligence official later identified her captors as local commanders Mullah <unk> and Mullah <unk> . Negotiations for Norgrove 's release were conducted through local tribal elders . 
 The three Afghans captured with Norgrove were released on 3 October . British Prime Minister David Cameron said that the primary fear was that she " was going to be passed up the terrorist chain , which would increase further the already high risk that she would be killed " . The British foreign office asked the media not to release details about Norgrove 's personal life while she was in captivity to avoid attaching " trophy value " to her kidnapping . 
 = = = Rescue attempt and death = = = 
 Intelligence reports indicated that a group of local elders were calling for Norgrove to be executed " like the Russian " ( a possible reference to the Russian war in Afghanistan ) . There were concerns that she might be moved into North Waziristan in Pakistan , about 10 miles ( 16 km ) away . The intelligence prompted British Prime Minister Cameron and William Hague to approve a United States special operations effort to rescue Norgrove during her 13th night of captivity . The operation was spearheaded by " SEAL Team Six " , Navy SEALs from the Naval Special Warfare Development Group . 
 The SEALs staged a predawn raid on the Taliban hillside compound hideout , where Norgrove was held in a shack , on 8 October 2010 . The stronghold was surrounded by 16 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) high , 2 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) thick perimeter walls in a densely wooded area in the village of <unk> , 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) up a steep mountain in the Korengal Valley . 
 At approximately 3 : 30 am 20 SEALs and about 24 U.S. Army Rangers from the 75th Ranger Regiment ( wearing night @-@ vision goggles ) approached the compound , fast roping from two CH @-@ 47 Chinook helicopters . They were fired on from the compound and from a nearby position by Taliban armed with AK @-@ 47s , rocket @-@ propelled grenades and suicide vests . Two American snipers aboard a helicopter killed two guards using sound @-@ suppressed rifles . An AC @-@ 130 Spectre gunship provided the U.S. troops on the ground with close air support , killing two fleeing Taliban . The Rangers secured enemy positions on the nearby hills , and all six Taliban gunmen who fought the U.S. forces were killed . 
 During the gunfight Norgrove 's captors dragged her outside the building where she was being held , but she apparently broke away from them . Video footage of the raid showed an explosion in her vicinity ; Norgrove was then found , injured , in a fetal position in a gully . 
 Norgrove was removed from the scene via helicopter and received medical care , but she died . It was initially reported that she had been killed by one of her captors setting off a suicide vest . According to The Guardian , insurgents often put on suicide vests if they think they are in danger of being attacked . Taliban commanders Mullah <unk> and Mullah <unk> ( who were holding Norgrove ) were among those killed in the raid , according to an Afghan intelligence official . Other women and children in the compound were uninjured , and no members of the rescue team were wounded . 
 = = Joint investigation = = 
 British Foreign Secretary William Hague announced Norgrove 's death . In a written statement , he said that after receiving information on her location it was " decided that , given the danger she was facing , her best chance of safe release was to act on that information . " Prime Minister Cameron defended the rescue attempt : " Decisions on operations to free hostages are always difficult . But where a British life is in such danger , and where we and our allies can act , I believe it is right to try . " 
 On 10 October , an unnamed Afghan intelligence officer said that Norgrove was killed by a grenade thrown by one of her captors . The following day , Cameron said that new information indicated Norgrove may have accidentally been killed by a U.S. grenade . The Prime Minister said in an interview , " Linda could have died as a result of a grenade detonated by the task force during the assault . However , this is not definite . " A U.S. military statement read , " Subsequent review of surveillance footage and discussions with members of the rescue team do not conclusively determine the cause of her death " . 
 U.S. President Barack Obama promised " to get to the bottom " of the failed rescue attempt . General David Petraeus , commander of the NATO security force in Afghanistan , ordered an investigation into the incident . U.S. Major General Joseph <unk> ( then Chief of Staff of the U.S. Special Operations Command ) and British Brigadier Robert <unk> ( Head of Joint Force Support , UK Forces Afghanistan ) were appointed to lead a joint UK and U.S. investigation . It was reported on 12 October that the results were expected within days , and Norgrove 's family was kept informed of the investigation 's progress . 
 Whilst the military investigation was conducted , Norgrove 's body was returned to the United Kingdom on 14 October on a Royal Air Force flight to RAF Lyneham . A humanist funeral ceremony , attended by hundreds of people , was held on 26 October at the Uig Community Centre in the Western Isles . Norgrove was buried at <unk> cemetery . 
 On 2 December Hague announced the results of the joint investigation , which concluded that Norgrove was accidentally killed by a grenade thrown by a U.S sailor . Hague said to the House of Commons , " A grenade was thrown by a member of the rescue team who feared for his own life and those of his team towards a gully from where some of the insurgents had emerged . When the grenade was thrown no member of the team had seen , or heard , Linda Norgrove . " Navy SEALs did not immediately notify senior officers about throwing the grenade ; this breached military law , and a number of sailors were disciplined . 
 A post @-@ mortem examination of Norgrove 's body was conducted by British coroner Russell Delaney on 19 October 2010 . Detective Chief Inspector Colin Smith of the Metropolitan Police told an inquest , opened 22 October in the Salisbury coroner 's court , that the examination identified the cause of death as " penetrating fragment injuries to the head and chest . " In February 2011 the coroner recorded a narrative verdict confirming the earlier military investigations ' findings that Norgrove was killed by a member of the U.S. rescue team , noting that a gunshot wound to the leg Norgrove received during the rescue did not contribute to her death . In October 2012 Abdul <unk> , Norgrove 's colleague and fellow captive , told the BBC that she asked the kidnappers if they were going to kill her : " Linda asked the abductors when they were planning to kill her and then the abductors talked to her in a very soft language and they told her and assured her that she would not be killed , because that was not their purpose to kill her — all they wanted was to release some of their prisoners , in the end she would be released when this deed is done . " 
 = = Tributes = = 
 James <unk> , regional director for Development Alternatives Inc . ( the company for which Norgrove worked when she was kidnapped ) , released a statement : " We are saddened beyond words by the death of a wonderful woman whose sole purpose in Afghanistan was to do good – to help the Afghan people achieve a measure of prosperity and stability in their everyday lives as they set about rebuilding their country . " United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator Robert Watkins praised Norgrove : " She was a true advocate for the people of Afghanistan and was dedicated to bringing improvements to their lives " , and " her spirit and compassion will be greatly missed " . First Minister of Scotland Alex Salmond said , " Ms. Norgrove was a dedicated aid worker who was doing everything she could to help people in Afghanistan — hopefully that legacy of service in a humanitarian cause can be of some comfort to her loved ones in their time of grief " . 
 Norgrove received the 2011 Robert Burns Humanitarian Award posthumously for her work in Afghanistan . Her family has established the Linda Norgrove Foundation to continue her relief work . 
 = The Most Famous Man in America = 
 The Most Famous Man in America : The Biography of Henry Ward Beecher is a 2006 biography of the 19th @-@ century American minister Henry Ward Beecher , written by Debby Applegate and published by Doubleday . The book describes Beecher 's childhood , ministry , support for the abolition of slavery and other social causes , and widely publicized 1875 trial for adultery . 
 Before publishing the book , Applegate researched and wrote about Beecher for twenty years , starting when she was an undergraduate student at Beecher 's alma mater , Amherst College . The book was generally well received by critics . In 2007 , it was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography . 
 = = Background = = 
 As an undergraduate student worker at Amherst College , Applegate was assigned to assemble an exhibit on a famous alumnus and selected Beecher . She later wrote about him for her undergraduate senior thesis and made him the subject of her PhD dissertation at Yale University . After graduation , Applegate signed a publishing contract for a biography of Beecher . To write a biography with popular appeal , Applegate studied fiction writing , including techniques for suspense and pornographic writing . She structured the resulting book as a psychological thriller . 
 Though she had originally hoped to publish the book during the 1998 Lewinsky scandal , in which US President Bill Clinton was discovered to have had a sexual relationship with a White House intern , the research took several years longer than she had initially planned . The book was finally released in 2006 by Doubleday and Three Leaves Press in hardback , paperback , and e @-@ book editions . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The Most Famous Man in America follows the life of 19th @-@ century American minister Henry Ward Beecher . Its introduction describes Beecher 's speech at Fort Sumter , South Carolina , at the close of the American Civil War ; Beecher was personally invited to speak by President Abraham Lincoln , who commented , " We had better send Beecher down to deliver the address on the occasion of the raising of the flag because if it had not been for Beecher there would have been no flag to raise " . Applegate then retells Beecher 's sometimes difficult childhood as the son of Lyman Beecher , himself a famous evangelist . Henry was initially overshadowed by his accomplished siblings , who included Harriet Beecher Stowe , later the author of the antislavery novel Uncle Tom 's Cabin . Henry discovered a gift for public speaking and went into the ministry , attending Amherst College and Lane Theological Seminary . He then served as a minister in Lawrenceburg , Indiana and Indianapolis before moving on to the richer post of the Plymouth Church in Brooklyn , New York . 
 In New York , Beecher soon acquired fame on the lecture circuit for his novel oratorical style , in which he employed humor , dialect , and slang . Over the course of his ministry , he developed a theology emphasizing God 's love above all else , in contrast to his father 's stern Calvinism . He also grew interested in social reform , particularly the abolitionist movement . In the years leading up to the Civil War , he raised money to purchase slaves from captivity and to send rifles — nicknamed " Beecher 's Bibles " — to abolitionists fighting in Kansas and Nebraska . He toured Europe during the Civil War speaking in support of the Union . After the war , Beecher supported social reform causes such as women 's suffrage and temperance . 
 In the book 's closing chapters , Applegate details Beecher 's relationship with Elizabeth Tilton , wife of his friend and associate Theodore Tilton , and its consequences . Elizabeth Tilton both confessed to and retracted her confession of an affair with Beecher ; her husband later filed adultery charges against Beecher , resulting in one of the most widely reported American trials of the century . 
 In assessing Beecher 's legacy , Applegate states that 
 His reputation has been eclipsed by his own success . Mainstream Christianity is so deeply infused with the rhetoric of Christ 's love that most Americans can imagine nothing else , and have no appreciation or memory of the revolution wrought by Beecher and his peers . 
 Applegate adds that it is hard not to consider Beecher 's various affairs or near @-@ affairs hypocritical , but compares him to other great leaders whose need for love and approval led them into sex scandals . Ultimately , Applegate concludes , Beecher was able " to transform his flaws into a powerful force of empathy and ambition " that " brought a new emotional candor to public life " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The Most Famous Man in America was well received by critics . NPR selected it as one of the year 's best nonfiction books , stating that the book " convinces readers of the truth of that swaggering title " . Kirkus Reviews called it a " beautifully written biography of America 's one best @-@ known preacher ... An exceptionally thorough and thoughtful account of a spectacular career that helped shape and reflect national preoccupations before , during and after the Civil War . " Publishers Weekly wrote that " this assessment of Beecher is judicious and critical . Applegate gives an insightful account . " In a review for The Boston Globe , Katherine A. Powers called the book a " fantastic story with novelistic flair and penetration into the ever @-@ changing motives and expediencies of its many actors . " Jon Meacham , reviewing for The Washington Post , called the book " illuminating and thorough " . 
 Michael Kazin , reviewing the book for The New York Times , stated that the book occasionally " loses its force in a thicket of personal details " , but concluded that it is " a biography worthy of its subject " . Deidre Donahue , writing in USA Today , also stated that the book had " sometimes excessive detail " but praised its " marvelous perspective " . Ernest W. Lefever wrote in The Washington Times that " Applegate 's fact @-@ studded and fast @-@ paced portrait of one of America 's most famous preachers from one of America 's most famous 19th @-@ century families is a remarkably authentic mirror of the times " , criticizing only the " minor flaw " of a lack of nuance in her description of Calvinism . Heather Cox Richardson praised the book in The Chicago Tribune , calling it " one of those rare books that delivers a great deal more than it promises " ; though critical of what she saw as some factual errors and " unsubstantiated claims " by Applegate , such as Lyman Beecher 's role in creating mass media , Richardson concluded that these flaws " do not cripple her story " . 
 On April 16 , 2007 , the book was announced as the winner of the Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography . Applegate said of her win , " Half of it is just good luck ... Had it come out four years ago , I don 't think the climate was ready for it . The religious right intersection with politics is very important now . " 
 = Ohio State Route 822 = 
 State Route 822 ( SR 822 ) is an unsigned east – west state highway in the eastern portion of the U.S. state of Ohio . The short route was designated in 1990 . Its western terminus is at the intersection of 7th Street and the on- / off @-@ ramps for U.S. Route 22 ( US 22 ) , where it serves as a connection between the U.S. Route and SR 7 , the route 's eastern terminus . The whole route is in Steubenville , after multiple truncations due to the demolition of Fort Steuben Bridge . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 822 starts at 7th Street on University Boulevard , where it immediately meets US 22 east at an interchange with on- / off @-@ ramps . SR 822 then passes through 6th Street , before ending at SR 7 at a T @-@ intersection , which later becomes concurrent with US 22 . 
 Around 11 @,@ 580 vehicles use the route on average each day . The connector is part of the expanded National Highway System . SR 822 has open fields and ramps north of it , and businesses south of it . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 822 was designated in 1990 as US 22 's alignment was moved to the Veterans Memorial Bridge from Fort Steuben Bridge . Traffic began to drop as the structure of the bridge deteriorated , and the weight limit was lowered in 2004 . The Fort Steuben Bridge was closed in 2009 , a few years after plans of closure and demolition were announced . It was closed due to deteriorating conditions and limited use . The Ohio Department of Transportation ( ODOT ) created a temporary eastern terminus for the route at the north end of the SR 7 / 822 concurrency , where the bridge approach ramps began . The eastern terminus was changed to the south end of the SR 7 / 822 concurrency in 2013 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = A View to a Kill = 
 A View to a Kill ( 1985 ) is the fourteenth spy film of the James Bond series , and the seventh and last to star Roger Moore as the fictional MI6 agent James Bond . Although the title is adapted from Ian Fleming 's short story " From a View to a Kill " , the film has an entirely original screenplay . In A View to a Kill , Bond is pitted against Max Zorin , who plans to destroy California 's Silicon Valley . 
 The film was produced by Albert R. Broccoli and Michael G. Wilson , who also wrote the screenplay with Richard Maibaum . It was the third James Bond film to be directed by John Glen , and the last to feature Lois Maxwell as Miss Moneypenny . 
 Despite receiving a mixed reception by critics , it was a commercial success , with the Duran Duran theme song " A View to a Kill " performing well in the charts and earning a Golden Globe nomination for Best Song . Christopher Walken was also praised for portraying a " classic Bond villain " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 MI6 agent James Bond is sent to Siberia to locate the body of 003 and recover a microchip originating from the Soviet Union . Upon his return Q analyses the microchip , establishing it to be a copy of one designed to withstand an electromagnetic pulse and made by government contractor Zorin Industries . 
 Bond visits Ascot Racecourse to observe the company 's owner , Max Zorin . Zorin 's horse wins a race but proves hard to control . Sir Godfrey Tibbett , a racehorse trainer and MI6 agent , believes Zorin 's horse was drugged , although tests proved negative . Through Tibbett , Bond meets with French private detective Achille Aubergine who informs Bond that Zorin is holding a horse sale later in the month . During their dinner at the Eiffel Tower , Aubergine is assassinated by Zorin 's bodyguard May Day , who subsequently escapes , despite being chased by Bond . 
 Bond and Tibbett travel to Zorin 's estate for the horse sale . Bond is puzzled by a woman who rebuffs him and finds out that Zorin has written her a cheque for $ 5 million . At night , Bond and Tibbett break into Zorin 's laboratory learning that he is implanting adrenaline @-@ releasing devices in his horses . Zorin identifies Bond as an agent , has May Day assassinate Tibbett , and attempts to have Bond killed too . 
 General Gogol of the KGB confronts Zorin for killing Bond without permission revealing that Zorin was initially trained and financed by the KGB , but has now gone rogue . Later , Zorin unveils to a group of investors his plan to destroy Silicon Valley which will give him — and the potential investors — a monopoly over microchip manufacture . 
 Bond goes to San Francisco where he learns from CIA agent Chuck Lee that Zorin could be the product of medical experimentation with steroids performed by a Nazi scientist , now Zorin 's physician Dr. Carl Mortner . He then investigates a nearby oil rig owned by Zorin and while there finds KGB agent Pola Ivanova recording conversations and her partner placing explosives on the rig . Ivanova 's partner is caught and killed , but Ivanova and Bond escape . Later Ivanova takes the recording , but finds that Bond had switched tapes , leaving her with a recording of Japanese music . Bond tracks down the woman Zorin attempted to pay off , State Geologist Stacey Sutton , and discovers that Zorin is trying to buy her family oil business . 
 The two travel to San Francisco City Hall to check Zorin 's submitted plans . However , Zorin is alerted to their presence and arrives , killing the Chief Geologist with Bond 's pistol and setting fire to the building to both frame Bond for the murder and kill him at the same time . Bond and Sutton escape from the fire , but when the police try to arrest Bond , he and Sutton escape in a fire engine . 
 Bond and Sutton infiltrate Zorin 's mine , discovering his plot to detonate explosives beneath the lakes along the Hayward and San Andreas faults , which will cause them to flood , causing Silicon Valley and everything within to be submerged underwater forever . A larger bomb is also in the mine to destroy a " geological lock " that prevents the two faults from moving at the same time . Once in place , Zorin and his security chief Scarpine flood the mines and kill the mine workers . Sutton escapes while Bond fights May Day ; when she realises Zorin abandoned her , she helps Bond remove the larger bomb , putting the device onto a handcar and pushing it out of the mine , where it explodes , killing her . 
 Zorin , who had escaped in his airship with Scarpine and Mortner , abducts Sutton as Bond grabs hold of the airship 's mooring rope . Zorin tries to knock Bond off the rope , but he manages to moor the airship to the framework of the Golden Gate Bridge . Sutton attacks Zorin and in the fracas , Mortner and Scarpine are temporarily knocked out . Sutton flees and joins Bond out on the bridge , but Zorin follows them out with an axe . The ensuing fight between Zorin and Bond culminates with Zorin falling to his death , whereupon an enraged Mortner attacks Bond using sticks of dynamite , but Bond cuts the airship free , causing Mortner to drop the dynamite in the cabin , blowing up the airship and killing himself and Scarpine . General Gogol awards Bond the Order of Lenin for foiling Zorin 's scheme . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Roger Moore as James Bond , MI6 agent 007 . 
 Christopher Walken as Max Zorin : a psychopathic industrialist , the product of a Nazi genetic experiment planning to destroy the Silicon Valley to gain a monopoly in the microchip market . 
 Tanya Roberts as Stacey Sutton : The granddaughter of an oil tycoon whose company is taken over by Zorin . 
 Grace Jones as May Day : Zorin 's lover and chief henchwoman . She seemingly possesses superhuman strength . 
 Patrick Macnee as Sir Godfrey Tibbett : Bond 's ally , a horse trainer who helps him infiltrate Zorin 's chateau and stables . 
 Patrick Bauchau as Scarpine : Zorin 's murderous loyal associate . 
 David Yip as Chuck Lee : a CIA agent who assists Bond and Sutton in San Francisco . 
 Willoughby Gray as Dr. Carl Mortner : formally Hans <unk> , a Nazi scientist and father figure to Zorin ( in the German release version , he is a Polish communist ) . 
 Fiona Fullerton as Pola Ivanova ; a KGB agent known to Bond , sent by Gogol to spy on Zorin . 
 Manning Redwood as Bob Conley : Zorin 's chief mining engineer who handles his oil interests on the East Bay . 
 Alison Doody as Jenny Flex : One of May Day 's assistants who is often seen with Pan Ho . 
 Robert Brown as M : The head of MI6 
 Desmond Llewelyn as Q : An MI6 officer in charge of the research and development branch . He supplies 007 with his equipment for his mission . 
 Lois Maxwell as Miss Moneypenny : M 's secretary ( Maxwell 's 14th and final appearance in the role ) . 
 Geoffrey Keen as Fredrick Gray : The British Minister of Defence . 
 Walter Gotell as General Gogol : The head of the KGB . 
 Papillon Soo Soo as Pan Ho : One of May Day 's assistants . 
 Daniel Benzali as W. G. Howe : A city official working at San Francisco City Hall . 
 Bogdan <unk> as <unk> : one of General Gogol 's KGB agents who is killed while infiltrating Zorin 's oil rig . 
 Dolph Lundgren in an early , minor role as Venz , one of General Gogol 's KGB agents . 
 Jean <unk> as French private detective Achille Aubergine . 
 Maud Adams is said to be visible as an extra in one of the Fisherman 's Wharf scenes . In the DVD documentary Inside A View to a Kill , Adams explains that she was visiting her friend Moore on location and ended up in the crowd , but admits she is unable to actually see herself in the film ; in the same documentary , director John Glen confirms that Adams appears as an extra , but does not specify where she is visible . The appearance remained a mystery for years until she was identified as standing in the background during one of the Fisherman 's Wharf scenes . As a result , Adams is confirmed to have appeared in this and two other Bond films , The Man with the Golden Gun in 1974 and Octopussy in 1983 . 
 = = Production = = 
 A View to a Kill was produced by Albert R. Broccoli and Michael G. Wilson . Wilson also co @-@ authored the screenplay along with Richard Maibaum . At the end of Octopussy during the " James Bond Will Return " sequence , it listed the next film as " From a View to a Kill " , the name of the original short story ; however , the title was later changed . When a company with a name similar to Zorin ( the Zoran Corporation ) was discovered in the United States , a disclaimer was added to the start of the film affirming that Zorin was not related to any real @-@ life company . This is the first Bond film to have a disclaimer ( The Living Daylights had a disclaimer about the use of the Red Cross ) . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Early publicity for the film in 1984 included an announcement that David Bowie would play Zorin . He turned it down , saying , " I didn 't want to spend five months watching my stunt double fall off cliffs . " The role was offered to Sting and finally to Christopher Walken . 
 Dolph Lundgren has a brief appearance as one of General Gogol 's KGB agents . Lundgren , who was dating Grace Jones at the time , was visiting her on set when one day an extra was missing so the director John Glen then asked him if he wanted to get a shot at it . Lundgren appears during the confrontation between Gogol and Zorin at the racetrack , standing several steps below Gogol . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The film was shot at Pinewood Studios in London , Iceland , Switzerland , France and the United States . Several French landmarks such as the Eiffel Tower , its Jules Verne Restaurant and the Château de Chantilly were filmed . The rest of the major filming was done at Fisherman 's Wharf and the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco . The Lefty O 'Doul Bridge was featured in the fire engine chase scene . The horse racing scenes were shot at Ascot Racecourse . 
 Production of the film began on 23 June 1984 in Iceland , where the second unit filmed the pre @-@ title sequence . On 27 June 1984 , several leftover canisters of petrol used during filming of Ridley Scott 's Legend caused Pinewood Studios ' " 007 Stage " to burn to the ground . The stage was rebuilt , and reopened in January 1985 ( renamed as " Albert R. Broccoli 's 007 Stage " ) for filming of A View to a Kill . Work had continued on other stages at Pinewood when Roger Moore rejoined the main unit there on 1 August 1984 . The crew then departed for shooting the horse @-@ racing scenes at Royal Ascot Racecourse . The scene in which Bond and Sutton enter the mineshaft was then filmed in a waterlogged quarry near Staines and the Amberley Chalk Pits Museum in West Sussex . 
 On 6 October 1984 , the fourth unit , headed by special effects supervisor John Richardson , began its work on the climactic fight sequence . At first , only a few plates constructed to resemble the Golden Gate Bridge were used . Later that night , shooting of the burning San Francisco City Hall commenced . The first actual scenes atop the bridge were filmed on 7 October 1984 . 
 In Paris it was planned that two stunt men , B.J. Worth and Don Caldvedt , would help film two takes of a parachute drop off a ( clearly visible ) platform that extended from a top edge of the Eiffel Tower . However , sufficient footage was obtained from Worth 's jump , so Caldvedt was told he would not be performing his own jump . Caldvedt , unhappy at not being able to perform the jump , parachuted off the tower without authorisation from the City of Paris . He was subsequently sacked by the production team for jeopardising the continuation of filming in the city . 
 Airship Industries managed a major marketing coup with the inclusion of their Skyship 500 series blimp in the film . At the time Airship Industries were producing a fleet of blimps which were recognisable over many capitals of the world offering tours , or advertising sponsorship deals . As all Bond films have included the most current technology , this included the lighter than air interest . 
 The blimp seen in the climax , was then on a promotional tour of Los Angeles after its participation in the opening ceremony of the 1984 Olympic Games . At that time , it had " <unk> " painted across the side of the <unk> , but was replaced by " <unk> <unk> " for the film . During the summer of 1984 , the blimp was used to advertise Fujifilm . In real life , inflating the airship would take up to 24 hours , but during the film it was shown to take two minutes . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The soundtrack was composed by John Barry , and published by EMI / Capitol . The theme song , " A View to a Kill " , was written by Barry and Duran Duran , and performed by the band . " May Day Jumps " is the only track that uses the James Bond theme . Barry 's composition from On Her Majesty 's Secret Service was modified for use in the songs " Snow Job " , " He 's Dangerous " and " Golden Gate Fight " of A View to a Kill . " A View to a Kill " was second in the British charts and first in the American charts , thus becoming the peak song in the James Bond series . The 2015 track Writing 's On The Wall later out performed the song in the UK by reaching number one . 
 Duran Duran was chosen to do the song after bassist John Taylor ( a lifelong Bond fan ) approached producer Cubby Broccoli at a party , and somewhat drunkenly asked " When are you going to get someone decent to do one of your theme songs ? " 
 During the opening sequence , a cover version of the 1965 Beach Boys song " California Girls " , performed by Gidea Park with Adrian Baker ( a tribute band ) , is used during a chase in which Bond snowboards ; it has been suggested that this teaser sequence helped initiate interest in snowboarding . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 This was the first Bond film with a premiere outside the UK , opening on 22 May 1985 at San Francisco ’ s Palace of Fine Arts . The British premiere was held on 12 June 1985 at the Odeon Leicester Square Cinema in London . The film was first broadcast on British television on 31 January 1990 . It achieved a box office collection of US $ 152 @.@ 4 million worldwide with $ 50 @.@ 3 million in the United States alone . On its opening weekend in the US it earned $ 10 @.@ 6 million . Although its box office reception was excellent , the film 's critical response was mostly negative . Rotten Tomatoes currently gives A View to a Kill a 36 % " Rotten " rating , which is the lowest rating for the Eon @-@ produced Bond films on the website . 
 One of the most common criticisms was that Roger Moore was 57 at the time of filming – and had visibly aged in the two years that had passed since Octopussy . The Washington Post critic said " Moore isn 't just long in the tooth – he 's got tusks , and what looks like an eye job has given him the pie @-@ eyed <unk> of a zombie . He 's not believable anymore in the action sequences , even less so in the romantic scenes – it 's like watching women fall all over Gabby Hayes . " Sean Connery declared that " Bond should be played by an actor 35 , 33 years old . I 'm too old . Roger 's too old , too ! " In a December 2007 interview , Roger Moore remarked , " I was only about four hundred years too old for the part . " 
 Moore also stated that , at the time , A View to a Kill was his least favourite Bond film , and mentioned that he was mortified to find out that he was older than his female co @-@ star 's mother . He was quoted saying " I was horrified on the last Bond I did . Whole <unk> of sequences where Christopher Walken was machine @-@ gunning hundreds of people . I said ' That wasn 't Bond , those weren 't Bond films . ' It stopped being what they were all about . You didn 't dwell on the blood and the brains spewing all over the place " . 
 Pauline Kael of The New Yorker said " The James Bond series has had its <unk> , but nothing before in the class of A View to a Kill . You go to a Bond picture expecting some style or , at least , some flash , some lift ; you don 't expect the dumb police @-@ car crashes you get here . You do see some ingenious daredevil feats , but they 're crowded together and , the way they 're set up , they don 't give you the irresponsible , giddy tingle you 're hoping for . " Kael also singled out the dispirited direction and the hopeless script . " Director John Glen stages the slaughter scenes so apathetically that the picture itself seems dissociated . ( I don 't think I 've ever seen another movie in which race horses were mistreated and the director failed to work up any indignation . If Glen has any emotions about what he puts on the screen , he keeps them to himself . ) " 
 Lawrence O 'Toole of Maclean 's believed it was one of the series ' best entries . " Of all the modern formulas in the movie industry , the James Bond series is among the most pleasurable and durable . Lavish with their budgets , the producers also bring a great deal of craft , wit and a sense of fun to the films . Agent 007 is like an old friend whom an audience meets for drinks every two years or so ; he regales them with tall tales , winking all the time . The 14th and newest Bond epic , A View to a Kill , is an especially satisfying encounter . Opening with a breathtaking ski chase in Siberia , A View to a Kill is the fastest Bond picture yet . Its pace has the precision of a Swiss watch and the momentum of a greyhound on the track . There is a spectacular chase up and down the Eiffel Tower and through Paris streets , which Bond finishes in a severed car on just two wheels . But none of the action prepares the viewer for the heart @-@ stopping climax with Zorin 's dirigible tangled in the cables on top of San Francisco 's Golden Gate Bridge . " And although O 'Toole believed that Moore was showing his age in the role , " there are plenty of tunes left in his violin . James Bond is still a virtuoso , with a licence to thrill . " 
 Brian J. Arthurs of The Beach Reporter said it was the worst film of the Bond series . C. Pea of the Time Out Film Guide said , " Grace Jones is badly wasted . " Norman Wilner of MSN chose it as the worst Bond film , while IGN picked as the fourth worst , and Entertainment Weekly as the fifth worst . 
 Bond historian John Brosnan believed A View to a Kill was Moore 's best Bond entry . He said Moore looked in better shape than the previous Bond film , Octopussy . Brosnan especially admired the dirigible finale . 
 Danny Peary had mixed feelings about A View to a Kill but was generally complimentary : " Despite what reviewers automatically reported , [ Moore ] looks trimmer and more energetic than in some of the previous efforts ... I wish Bond had a few more of his famous gadgets on hand , but his actions scenes are exciting and some of the stunt work is spectacular . Walken 's the first Bond villain who is not so much an evil person as a crazed neurotic . I find him more memorable than some of the more recent Bond foes ... Unfortunately , the filmmakers – who ruined villain Jaws by making him a nice guy in Moonraker – make the mistake of switching Mayday at the end from Bond 's nemesis to his accomplice , depriving us of a slam @-@ bang fight to the finish between the two ( I suppose gentleman Bond isn 't allowed to kill women , even a monster like Mayday ) ... [ The film ] lacks the flamboyance of earlier Bond films , and has a terrible slapstick chase sequence in San Francisco , but overall it 's fast @-@ paced , fairly enjoyable , and a worthy entry in the series . " . 
 Also among the more positive reviews was Movie Freaks 365 's Kyle Bell : " Good ol ' Roger gave it his best . ... Whether you can get past the absurdity of the storyline , you can 't really deny that it has stunning stunt work and lots of action . It 's an entertaining movie that could have been better . " 
 Roberts was nominated for a Golden Raspberry Award as Worst Actress , but she lost the trophy to Linda Blair for her performance in Night Patrol , Savage Island and Savage Streets . 
 = = Appearances in other media = = 
 This film was adapted into two video games in 1985 . The first , titled A View to a Kill , was published by Domark . It was available for the ZX Spectrum , Amstrad CPC , Commodore 64 , Oric 1 and Oric Atmos , and MSX . The second , titled James Bond 007 : A View to a Kill was a text @-@ based video game for DOS and Apple II computers . It was developed by <unk> , Inc. and published by Mindscape Inc . 
 The film was loosely adapted into a series of four Find Your Fate adventure game books , Win , Place , or Die , Strike it Deadly , Programmed for Danger , and Barracuda Run , which were released in 1985 . 
 May Day was a playable multiplayer character in the 1997 and 2000 video games GoldenEye 007 and The World Is Not Enough , for the Nintendo 64 and both N64 and PlayStation respectively . In the 2002 game Nightfire , May Day and Max Zorin also appears as bots . Other references include Nikolai Diavolo , a character in the 2004 game James Bond 007 : Everything or Nothing , claiming Zorin to be his mentor and friend . In GoldenEye : Rogue Agent , a multiplayer level is the summit of the Golden Gate Bridge , including the Zorin blimp , which would fire on players when activated . Players are also able to climb the suspension cables ( similar to the events of the film ) . 
 = Hurricane Dean = 
 Hurricane Dean was the strongest tropical cyclone of the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season . It was the most intense North Atlantic hurricane since Hurricane Wilma of 2005 , tying for seventh overall . Additionally , it made the third most intense Atlantic hurricane landfall . A Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane that formed on August 13 , 2007 , Dean took a west @-@ northwest path from the eastern Atlantic Ocean through the Saint Lucia Channel and into the Caribbean . It strengthened into a major hurricane , reaching Category 5 status on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale before passing just south of Jamaica on August 20 . The storm made landfall on the Yucatán Peninsula on August 21 as a powerful Category 5 storm . It crossed the peninsula and emerged into the Bay of Campeche weakened , but still a hurricane . It strengthened briefly before making a second landfall near Tecolutla in the Mexican state of Veracruz on August 22 . Dean drifted to the northwest , weakening into a remnant low which dissipated uneventfully over the southwestern United States . 
 The hurricane 's intense winds , waves , rains and storm surge were responsible for at least 45 deaths across ten countries and caused estimated damages of US $ 1 @.@ 66 billion . First impacting the islands of the Lesser Antilles , Dean 's path through the Caribbean devastated agricultural crops , particularly those of Martinique and Jamaica . Upon reaching Mexico , Hurricane Dean was a Category 5 storm , but it missed major population centers and its exceptional Category 5 strength landfall caused no deaths and less damage than in the Caribbean islands it passed as a Category 2 storm . 
 Through the affected regions , clean up and repair took months to complete . Donations solicited by international aid organizations joined national funds in clearing roads , rebuilding houses , and replanting destroyed crops . In Jamaica , where the damage was worst , banana production did not return to pre @-@ storm levels for over a year . Mexico 's tourist industry , too , took almost a year to rebuild its damaged cruise ship infrastructure . 
 Dean was the first hurricane to make landfall in the Atlantic basin at Category 5 intensity since Hurricane Andrew on August 24 , 1992 . Dean 's Category 5 landfall was in a sparsely populated area and thus far less damaging than Andrew 's , even though Dean was much larger , but its long swath of damage resulted in its name retirement from the World Meteorological Organization 's Atlantic hurricane naming lists . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 11 , 2007 , a tropical wave moved off the west coast of Africa , and , encountering favorable conditions , quickly developed into Tropical Depression Four about 520 miles ( 835 km ) west @-@ southwest of Cape Verde on August 13 . The depression moved briskly westward , and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Dean at 1500 UTC on August 14 . The storm 's intensity continued to build although dry air and cooler air inflow from the north were slowing structural development . Ragged bands formed on August 15 and the formation of a partial eyewall was observed later that day . 
 Intensification continued and the storm was upgraded to Hurricane Dean at 5 am EDT ( 0900 UTC ) August 16 . The deep @-@ layered ridge to the north continued to steer the system west , towards the Caribbean Sea . The storm quickly strengthened to a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . The storm 's development slowed slightly but a reconnaissance aircraft discovered a closed eyewall on August 17 as the storm passed through the Lesser Antilles . Data from the aircraft indicated that Hurricane Dean had strengthened to a Category 3 hurricane and its trailing bands were still over the Lesser Antilles . During the evening of August 17 , Dean strengthened into a Category 4 hurricane and continued to steadily grow in both size and intensity through the night . On August 18 the presence of a double eyewall was noted , indicating an eyewall replacement cycle and causing short term fluctuations in intensity . These fluctuations did not affect the storm 's well defined satellite presentation . Operationally , Dean was thought to have only been a Category 4 on the 18th , but post @-@ storm analysis shows that Dean had become a 165 miles per hour ( 265 km / h ) Category 5 that day . Dean weakened very slightly on the morning of August 19 as it finished the eyewall replacement cycle and began to interact with the island of Jamaica 
 Hurricane Dean passed south of Jamaica on the evening of August 19 and began to intensify again that night . Its eyewall replacement cycle was thought to be completed . A concentric eyewall was briefly observed again on the morning of August 20 , but did not last long . The hurricane , still tracking west @-@ northwest under the influence of a strengthening deep @-@ layered high pressure system to the north , moved over waters with extremely high heat content and began to strengthen once again . The eyewall became even better defined during the day , and , at 8 : 35 pm AST on August 20 ( 0035 August 21 , UTC ) , Dean restrengthened to a Category 5 hurricane , the highest rating on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . It made landfall as a Category 5 storm in Quintana Roo 's Costa Maya region , 40 mi ( 65 km ) northeast of the border between Mexico and Belize , and weakened on its way over land , reemerging on the western side of Yucatán as a Category 1 storm . Dean regained strength as it crossed the Gulf of Mexico , and made its second landfall as a Category 2 storm on August 22 , at around 11 : 30 CDT , near Tecolutla , Veracruz , to the south of Tuxpan , where after it moved westward , losing strength and disintegrating over central Mexico . A small remnant circulation reached the Pacific Ocean , eventually moving northwestward around an anticyclone , roughly parallel to the Mexican coast and finally back inland over the southwestern United States , where it completely dissipated on August 27 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Hurricane Dean 's smooth and well @-@ predicted track gave unusually advance warning to all of the nations in its path and allowed them time to prepare for the storm 's impact . Because of the advance warning and Dean 's extraordinary strength , the nations of Central America and the Caribbean set up hundreds of shelters , readied thousands of disaster recovery experts , evacuated hundreds of thousands of vulnerable residents , and prepared millions of dollars of emergency supplies . 
 = = = Lesser Antilles = = = 
 As Hurricane Dean approached the Lesser Antilles the local meteorological services issued watches and warnings , advising residents to prepare for the storm . Hurricane warnings were issued for St. Lucia , Dominica , Martinique and Guadeloupe and its dependencies . Hurricane watches were issued for Saba and St. Eustatius . Tropical storm warnings were issued for Barbados , Antigua , Barbuda , St. Kitts , Nevis , and St. Maarten St. Vincent and the Grenadines , the U.S. Virgin Islands , and the British Virgin Islands . Tropical storm watches were issued for Sint Maarten , St. Vincent , Grenada and its dependencies , Montserrat , and Anguilla . 
 Local authorities closed airports , set up shelters , and readied emergency service personnel . Authorities in Martinique canceled a memorial to the victims of West Caribbean Airways Flight 708 and began to set up shelters . In Dominica , tourists were evacuated to concrete shelters and the vast majority of foreign medical students from the Ross University School of Medicine evacuated the island . The government of Dominica also canceled leave for emergency service personnel and evacuated Princess Margret Hospital , fearing that its roof might be vulnerable to the storm 's winds . Martinique 's main airport and both of St. Lucia 's commercial airports closed when the last airplanes landed on the night of August 16 and the storm 's outer rainbands began to sweep over the island . 
 In anticipation of Dean 's significant damage , several emergency response groups gathered funds and readied personnel . On August 14 the Caribbean Disaster Emergency Response Agency ( CDERA ) placed its Regional Response Mechanism on standby and contacted the National Disaster Coordinators of all member states in the Lesser Antilles . On August 15 the U.S. Agency for International Development ( USAID ) dispatched teams to Barbados , Dominica , and St. Kitts in advance of the hurricane to provide damage assessment should the hurricane affect those islands . The Eastern Caribbean Donor Group convened a meeting on August 16 under the Chair of the Resident Representative United Nations Development Programme Barbados in anticipation that member states would require international assistance . 
 = = = Greater Antilles = = = 
 Hurricane warnings were issued for all of Jamaica , for Haiti from Port @-@ au @-@ Prince to the Dominican border , and for the Dominican Republic from Barahona to the Haitian border . Tropical Storm warnings were issued for the rest of Hispaniola and for coastal Cuba between Camagüey and Guantánamo . Hundreds of thousands were evacuated from vulnerable low @-@ lying and coastal areas and disaster management programs were activated throughout the Greater Antilles . 
 Jamaica , which was forecast to bear the brunt of Hurricane Dean , underwent the most extensive preparations . The Jamaican government executed long @-@ standing evacuation plans , including converting the country 's national arena into a shelter and relocating inmates from two maximum security prisons . Political parties in the island suspended their campaigning for the August 27 national elections , to allow residents to prepare for the storm . Curfews were put in place for parts of the island , while off @-@ duty essential personnel were called back to work . More than 1 @,@ 000 schools and churches were converted to emergency shelters , but residents only occupied 47 of them before the storm 's arrival . Evidently the country 's high crime rate led islanders to fear for their belongings should they abandon their homes . UNICEF prepared 4 emergency health kits and 1 @,@ 000 water containers and Copa Airlines agreed to fly the supplies to Jamaica on its scheduled August 22 flight , if possible . The World Food Program prepared food stocks in nearby Haiti , ready to move them to Jamaica if they were needed . The United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination ( <unk> ) team tried to reach Jamaica , but only one member arrived before all incoming flights were canceled . The United States confirmed that it would offer aid if it was needed , and the North @-@ West Caribbean Donor Group met to decide what actions would need to be taken . 
 The island of Hispaniola was also predicted to be heavily affected by the storm . Workers from World Vision supplied food , clean water , medicines and emergency generators in the southern provinces of the Dominican Republic , and in the southern departments of Haiti where hurricane warnings had been issued . In low @-@ lying areas , 1 @,@ 580 residents of the Dominican Republic and more than 1 @,@ 000 Haitians were evacuated as the storm approached . Small craft were advised to stay in port , while Haiti 's Toussaint Louverture International Airport was closed . 
 The Cayman Islands were expected to suffer badly if Hurricane Dean passed too close , and mandatory evacuations were instigated for the low @-@ lying Little Cayman . Tourists were forbidden from entering the island and extra flights were added to evacuate those that were already there . Schools and civic centers were converted to shelters on Grand Cayman and Cayman Brac , and , despite the mandatory evacuation , one shelter was opened on Little Cayman for the residents who remained there . Expecting catastrophic damage , two Royal Navy ships of the Atlantic Patrol Task ( North ) , HMS Portland and RFA Wave Ruler , followed 150 mi ( 240 km ) behind the storm in order to arrive at Cayman as soon after the hurricane as possible . 
 Cuba and Puerto Rico , neither of which were expected to experience the worst of Dean 's strength , prepared more modestly . Cuba 's Civil Defense evacuated 350 @,@ 000 people from the coastal provinces . The government in Havana suspended all tourist programs ahead of the storm . Soldiers and emergency officials were prepared to convert schools and other government buildings into temporary shelters , but stood down when it became evident that they would not needed . The U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) deployed a five @-@ member team to Puerto Rico ahead of Hurricane Dean . They were equipped with satellite communication systems to provide video @-@ teleconferencing and help make real @-@ time assessments of any damage . 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 With Hurricane Dean 's path predicted well in advance of the storm , the Government of Mexico was able to make ample preparations . On August 17 , a state of emergency was declared for the state of Quintana Roo where Dean was expected to make landfall . On August 18 authorities began evacuating tourists and those residents living in the most vulnerable parts of Quintana Roo . The state government set up storm shelters in schools and other public buildings . With emergency supplies at the ready , the state of Yucatán , Quintana Roo 's neighbour to the northwest , declared a green alert . On August 19 a hurricane watch was issued on the Yucatán Peninsula from Chetumal to San Felipe and residents made their last @-@ minute preparations . 
 = = = Belize = = = 
 A hurricane warning was issued for the coastal locations north of Belize City with the forecast of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) winds . The government instituted a dusk @-@ to @-@ dawn curfew from Belize City to the Mexican border . On August 16 and 17 , Prime Minister Said Musa chaired two meetings of Belize 's National Emergency Management Organization ( <unk> ) . He instructed the newly created Coastguard to evacuate popular tourist sites Caye Caulker and Ambergris Caye by boat and plane . Authorities also evacuated Belize City 's three hospitals , moving high @-@ risk patients inland to the capital Belmopan . The mayor urged residents to leave Belize City and to make use of shelters in the capital . 
 The United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination team dispatched two members to Belize City and the rest of the team traveled to Belmopan . Government supplies were stored in Orange Walk , Corozal ready for post @-@ storm relief . Essential equipment from the Red Cross and the Pan American Health Organization was stored in the elevated UNICEF building and the Belize City UN building was converted to a crisis center . 
 = = = Gulf of Mexico = = = 
 Oil futures spiked on August 15 as analysts considered the impact of Hurricane Dean on refining capacity if it were to move into the Caribbean as predicted . Transocean evacuated 11 nonessential workers late on August 15 from an oil rig located about 160 mi ( 260 km ) southeast of New Orleans . The company left about 125 personnel on board the structure . A day later , Royal Dutch Shell evacuated 275 ancillary staff , following an evacuation of 188 due to Tropical Storm Erin . 
 On August 18 , 2007 , 10 @,@ 300 barrels ( 1 @,@ 640 m3 ) of oil and 11 million cubic feet ( 310 @,@ 000 m ³ ) of natural gas were shut @-@ in per day , accounting for 0 @.@ 8 % of crude production in the Gulf of Mexico . By 11 : 30 am CST ( 1630 UTC ) , two rigs and one platform evacuated personnel . 
 Pemex , the state @-@ owned Mexican oil company , made preparations to shut down oil production on August 19 ahead of Dean . It evacuated 13 @,@ 360 workers from more than 140 oil platforms , using 55 boats and 29 helicopters . As the storm continued to intensify , the number of evacuated Pemex workers increased to 18 @,@ 000 on August 20 , and all 407 wells and drilling operations were abandoned . This reduced the worldwide production of oil and natural gas by 2 @.@ 65 million barrels ( 421 @,@ 000 m3 ) and 2 @.@ 6 billion cubic feet ( 74 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) per day , respectively . 
 = = = Other regions = = = 
 Throughout the Caribbean Sea , about a dozen cruise ships altered their routes to avoid Hurricane Dean . Honduras was put on a state of preventative alert for 48 hours , particularly the departments to the north of the country ; the Bay Islands were on a state of red alert . There were places ready to accommodate 10 @,@ 000 people for 15 days if necessary . 
 In the United States , the Louisiana Governor 's Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness activated its Crisis Action Team on August 16 to monitor the storm and coordinate preparation . Governor of Louisiana Kathleen Blanco declared a state of emergency early on the evening of August 17 , asking for a presidential emergency declaration to give Louisiana access to federal funds prior to any landfall . Texas Governor Rick Perry declared Dean to be an imminent threat to the state , and thus initiated a full @-@ scale hurricane preparedness effort on August 17 when the storm was at least five days away . Prior to the storm , Texas suffered severe flooding from several June – July storms , and Tropical Storm Erin left the ground still saturated . Governor Perry feared that more rainfall from Dean would cause additional flash flooding , and had 250 Texas Parks and Wildlife Department crews on standby with boats to assist in potential evacuations . He was willing to deploy up to 10 @,@ 000 Texas Military Forces soldiers , and did deploy several elements of the Texas State Guard who set up emergency shelters . The Texas fuel industry began surging fuel loads to coastal counties to ensure adequate fuel in the event of the hurricane causing a disruption to the fuel distribution system . In anticipation of evacuations , the Texas Department of Transportation began working on extra evacuation lanes and contraflow . NASA cut short the STS @-@ 118 mission as a precaution , in case Dean approached Mission Control at the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston . To that effect , mission managers cut the mission 's final spacewalk short by two hours , allowing them to land a day earlier than originally planned . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Fifteen countries felt the effects of Hurricane Dean as its path through the Caribbean Sea claimed 42 lives . The hurricane first brushed the Lesser Antilles on August 17 , 2007 , and as it passed through the interior of the Caribbean its outer rain bands swept over the Greater Antilles . It passed Jamaica as a Category 4 hurricane , and strengthened to a Category 5 storm as it made landfall on Mexico 's Yucatán Peninsula on August 21 . A second landfall on August 22 was less devastating . 
 = = = Lesser Antilles = = = 
 Hurricane Dean entered the Caribbean as a Category 2 hurricane through the Saint Lucia Channel on August 17 . It moved briskly between the Lesser Antillean islands of St. Lucia and Martinique , with its storm surge and rain bands reaching every island in the chain . Damage was most severe in Martinique where total damage was estimated at € 400 million and three indirect deaths , while nearby Guadaloupe suffered € 400 million of damage . In St. Lucia , damage was mostly caused by the high seas and was estimated at US $ 18 million . 
 Martinique experienced 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) winds with gusts to 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) . The torrential rainfall , which reached 332 mm ( 13 @.@ 07 in ) caused flooding throughout the island , with the town of Rivière @-@ Pilote flooding completely . The majority of Martinique 's population were left without electricity , water , telephone , or food , and 600 <unk> were left homeless . The storm destroyed Martinique 's entire banana crop , and 70 % of the island 's sugar cane plantations . The damage to these two agricultural sectors accounted for the majority of the island 's € 400 million damage . 
 On the evening of August 16 , 12 hours before the storm arrived in St. Lucia , power outages began in some of the island 's neighborhoods . The night saw heavy rains , 1 @.@ 58 in ( 40 mm ) at St. Lucia 's Hewanorra International Airport , and intense thunderstorms and by morning hurricane force winds peaked at 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) . The winds uprooted trees , downed electricity poles , disabled bridges , triggered landslides , and damaged several roofs . Saint Lucia 's capital , Castries , was flooded by the storm surge which left boulders and fishing boats on the streets . One person drowned in <unk> after being swept away by a rain @-@ swollen river while trying to recover a cow . Hurricane Dean damaged the roofs of two of the island 's hospitals , but no one was injured . Several other buildings were damaged , mostly on the island 's northern coast which was most exposed to the hurricane . The Ministry of Education reported that 11 schools had sustained a combined total of EC $ 300 @,@ 000 of damage , and nationwide damage to housing and buildings totaled EC $ 800 @,@ 000 . The Ministry of Communications , Works , Transport , and Public Utilities reported that most of the country 's major infrastructure remained functional , and no long @-@ term disruptions occurred . 
 The hardest hit area of Saint Lucia was its agricultural sector . 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 20 km2 ) of banana farms in Mabouya Valley , Roseau Valley , and Marc Marc were severely damaged with many of the plantations waterlogged or outright destroyed . An average of 75 % of the crops were lost , with fields in the Northern Farms losing up to 80 % and in the Roseau Valley losing up to 85 % . The cost to the agriculture industry was $ 13 @.@ 2 million , bringing Hurricane Dean 's total cost on the island to $ 17 @.@ 3 million ( US $ 6 @.@ 4 million in 2007 ) or 0 @.@ 5 % of the nation 's GDP . 
 = = = Greater Antilles = = = 
 The storm passed to the south of most of the Greater Antilles , though its outer rain bands crossed many of the islands , and delivered hurricane force winds to Jamaica . Puerto Rico , Cuba , and the Cayman Islands were mostly spared , though Hurricane Dean passed 50 to 60 mi ( 80 to 95 km ) south of Jamaica as a Category 4 hurricane . In Jamaica the rain caused flooding on the eastern side of the island and landslides on the northeast end . At least two direct deaths were confirmed . Over 1 @,@ 500 roofs were lost , primarily to the hurricane force winds , and 1 @,@ 582 of the 3 @,@ 127 damaged homes were uninhabitable . Landslides and fallen trees blocked hundreds of roads , particularly in the rural northeast region . As in the Lesser Antilles , Jamaica suffered severe damage to its agricultural sector . Forty percent of the sugarcane crop , 80 to 100 % of the banana crop , 75 % of the coffee trees under three years old , and 20 % of the top layer of the cocoa crop were lost . Hurricane Dean affected 248 roads , including 186 that were blocked : 10 were blocked in the Kingston metropolitan region , 14 sections were blocked in St. Andrew , 43 roads were blocked in St. Catherine , eight roads were blocked in the Western Region ( Saint James , Hanover , Westmoreland , and Trelawny ) , and 110 roads were blocked in the Northeast region . 
 Haiti and the Dominican Republic , which share the island of Hispaniola , were spared much of the hurricane 's force , as it passed 170 mi ( 270 km ) to their south . However , 15 people were killed among the island 's two nations . Heavy rain flooded the streets of Santo Domingo and rough surf pounded the coast . Rain also caused landslides in Haiti , destroying several hundred homes and forcing 5 @,@ 154 people into temporary shelters , and compromising the temperamental water system in the town of Bainet . 
 Cuba , Puerto Rico , and the Cayman Islands experienced high surf and heavy rains , though despite a power outage in Grand Cayman , no significant damage was reported . There , 2000 people weathered the storm in temporary shelters . The hurricane 's outer bands swept over Cuba between August 19 and August 21 , bringing heavy rain and high seas , yet sparing the island from damaging winds . Rain from Hurricane Dean flooded several roads throughout Puerto Rico , and there was heavy surf along the island 's coast , but no deaths or injuries were reported . 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 The hurricane strengthened right up until it made landfall near Majahual on the Quintana Roo coast of the Yucatán Peninsula on August 21 , 2007 as a Category 5 hurricane . Wind gusts of 200 mph ( 320 km / h ) were reported . The state 's tourist cities of Cancún and Cozumel were spared the worst of the storm , but it wreaked havoc in the state capital Chetumal , 40 mi ( 65 km ) south of landfall , causing significant flooding . The town of Majahual , which had a population of 200 , was totally destroyed by the storm . Storm surge and high winds severely damaged or destroyed hundreds of buildings and had the strength to crumple steel girders . The waves tore away portions of the concrete docks at Costa Maya 's popular cruise port and the harbor was closed to cruise ships for almost a year . Despite the storm 's tremendous intensity , not a single death was attributed to its initial landfall , owing mostly to the government 's thorough preparations and forecasters ' ample warning . 
 Following the second landfall on the Veracruz coast , two rivers in the mountains of the state of Hidalgo overflowed , and rain fell as far west as the Pacific coast . Veracruz Governor Fidel Herrera said there was " a tremendous amount of damage " . Petroleum production was not severely damaged and quickly returned to normal . 
 Rainfall amounts of 4 to 8 in ( 100 to 200 mm ) fell across the states of Jalisco and Nayarit . This rainfall caused one fatality in Jalisco after a mudslide fell on 10 houses , killing one of the occupants . Five people were killed in Puebla by landslides , and one more was crushed after a wall on his house collapsed . One person in Veracruz was electrocuted after touching a power line while doing roof repairs . In Michoacán , a man was struck by lightning under a tree in the outer bands of the storm , and two people died in Hidalgo when the roof collapsed in their house . Hurricane Dean killed 12 people in Mexico but remarkably no one was killed by its first ( and catastrophically powerful ) landfall on the Yucatán Peninsula . Between the two landfalls damages , focused mainly in the agricultural sector , totaled Mex $ 2 @.@ 05 billion ( US $ 160 million ) . 
 = = = Belize = = = 
 The town of Corozal on Belize 's northern border experienced the worst conditions in the country . Trees were downed throughout the town , and minor flooding was reported . Eight thousand were displaced to shelters , though all returned home in less than two days . Throughout the entire country , the Belizean Ministry of Health reported no storm @-@ related fatalities and only a few minor injuries . 
 Belize 's agricultural sector received significant damage . Its sugar cane fields and papaya crops suffered extensive damage . The <unk> Government 's National Emergency Management Organization estimated Dean 's damage to the papaya industry at BZ $ 30 million and to the sugar industry at 6 @,@ 000 acres ( 24 km2 ) worth BZ $ 3 @.@ 6 million . Belize Sugar Industries Ltd. reported that the country 's sugar crop that year was the worst on record , producing 980 @,@ 000 lb ( 445 @,@ 000 kg ) of sub @-@ standard cane , compared to 1 @.@ 2 million lb ( 545 @,@ 000 kg ) of high quality cane the year before . More than 1000 people were out of work as a result of the damage to the papaya and sugar cane plantations . The government attempted to improve the next crop season in 2008 by providing fertilizers to the farmers whose land had been damaged by Dean the year before . Prime Minister Said Musa estimated that the hurricane 's total cost amounted to US $ 10 million . 
 = = = Other regions = = = 
 No land effects were reported in Nicaragua but a four @-@ year @-@ old girl drowned on a boat that sank amidst high winds and waves at the mouth of the <unk> River . 
 While the hurricane itself never approached the United States , heavy surf and rip currents were reported on the beaches of Florida . One person drowned and at least 35 people had to be rescued from the turbulent waters at Siesta Key caused by Hurricane Dean . Rough seas produced by Dean caused minor flooding in Dauphin Island , Alabama . Damages from the flooding amounted to $ 100 @,@ 000 . The remnant circulation of Dean , after lingering off the Pacific Coast , moved inland by Santa Barbara , California , and brought heavy thunderstorms and localized flooding to coastal Southern California on the morning of August 26 . The remnants crossed the Mojave Desert on the morning of August 27 . Las Vegas , received a daily record of 0 @.@ 58 in ( 15 mm ) of rain , with flash flooding and minor damage . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Despite Dean 's significant damage , it did not have severe effects on infrastructure , and the non @-@ agricultural sectors of most affected nations recovered quickly . Most cruise lines diverted their ships away from the Western Caribbean in anticipation of Hurricane Dean 's passage , though by August 27 all were back on schedule , except those with damaged ports in Belize and the Yucatán . The Lesser Antilles and the Greater Antilles were especially quick to resume servicing cruise lines , as their ports opened within days . 
 = = = Lesser Antilles = = = 
 Although Hurricane Dean was only a Category 2 hurricane when its northern eyewall passed over Martinique , the wind and widespread flooding destroyed 70 % of the island 's sugar cane crop and all of its banana crop , valued at € 400 million or 10 % of GDP . Remarkably the tourism industry withstood the storm well ; only a few hotels reported minor damage and the airport opened the day after the hurricane . Other than landscaping damage , all of the island 's hotels were fully functional by the end of August . 
 The French Overseas Minister , Christian <unk> and French Prime Minister , Francois Fillon visited French Caribbean island to assess the storm 's damage . They estimated the storm left 600 people homeless . The brevity of their visit prompted some of Martinique 's famous writers , including Edouard <unk> , Patrick <unk> and Raphael <unk> , to write an open letter airing their grievances concerning French politics and the handling of Hurricane Dean 's impact . 
 Francois Fillon then visited Guadaloupe and brought with him a team of experts from the Ministry of the Interior to assess the nature and cost of the damage . The local government reported to them that 75 % of Guadeloupe 's banana plantations , valued at € 100 million , were totally destroyed . Despite promises by Overseas Minister Christian <unk> that all problems would be resolved within three months , it took over six months to restart banana production , and several more to restore lost capacity . Other than the crop damage , the island suffered only minor wind and flooding damage , both of which were quickly repaired . 
 = = = Jamaica = = = 
 On August 24 Jamaican Prime Minister Portia Simpson Miller announced that her government would provide JA $ 225 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 2 million ) in emergency assistance to the country 's agriculture sector . This aid was targeted at the country 's hardest @-@ hit parishes . She also announced a JA $ 500 million ( US $ 7 @.@ 1 million ) programme to provide grants and low @-@ interest loans for emergency housing repairs . Temporary tarpaulins were also provided to patch roofs at no cost . 
 The World Food Program immediately placed 5 @,@ 500 Jamaicans on complementary food assistance , a daily ration of 1900 kJ ( 450 kcal ) of High Energy Biscuits , for two weeks . Within three days US $ 398 @,@ 000 of pre @-@ prepared United States Agency for International Development ( USAID ) emergency supplies arrived on the island . The airlift was composed mostly of mattresses , blankets , plastic sheeting , hygiene kits and water containers . The Inter @-@ American Development Bank ( IDB ) provided a US $ 200 @,@ 000 grant to support the relief effort and the Chinese Red Cross , despite dealing with Typhoon <unk> , sent US $ 30 @,@ 000 to its Jamaican counterpart for the purchase of emergency relief supplies . 
 In December , four months after the hurricane struck the island , the World Bank 's Board of Directors approved a US $ 10 million emergency loan . World Bank Director for the Caribbean and the Jamaican Finance Minister negotiated a 17 @-@ year repayment plan , and endowed the money into the Jamaica Hurricane Dean Emergency Recovery Project . The Jamaica Social Investment Fund , which was charged with implementing the project , used the money to " rebuild and support schools , health centers , and community and farm roads affected by the hurricane " . The Hurricane Dean Emergency Recovery Project finally kicked off in June 2008 , with the issuance of rural road repair contracts valued at JA $ 37 million ( US $ 520 @,@ 000 ) . 
 By the end of the summer on 2008 , banana production in Jamaica was returning to pre @-@ Dean levels . With the help of JA $ 1 @.@ 1 billion ( US $ 15 @.@ 5 million ) of aid from the EU 's Banana Support Programme , thousands of acres were replanted . Banana chips were the first products ready for export at the beginning of the summer , with fresh banana production following shortly thereafter . 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 Although Dean 's landfall in Mexico occurred in a relatively uninhabited area and the storm 's well @-@ predicted track gave ample warning , the storm inflicted extreme damage . In Majahual , the only town to experience the full force of the hurricane , hundreds of buildings were destroyed . Quintana Roo Governor Félix González Canto reported that although the cleanup in the state capital of Chetumal was completed within three weeks , it took more than six months to fix all of the region 's more rural roads . Unable to handle the hurricane 's aftermath , the state government appealed to federal authorities for aid . Together , they established a housing @-@ repair fund which contributed to the reconstruction of over 37 @,@ 000 residences . 
 The cruise port of Puerto Costa Maya was severely damaged , causing Carnival Cruise Lines and Royal Caribbean Cruises , the world 's two largest cruise operators , to divert away from the port until at least 2009 . The Mexican government was quick to fund rebuilding of the destroyed concrete piers which , by June 2008 , were rebuilt to accommodate even larger ships than before . 
 The federal government was initially lauded for its swift and thorough preparation to which most observers , including the United Nations , attributed Dean 's low death toll . However , after the storm there were several accusations of political motivation in the distribution of aid . Members of President Felipe Calderón 's Partido <unk> Nacional ( PAN ) distributed bags of bread , funded by the nation 's disaster relief coffers , carrying the party 's logo . In Veracruz Governor Fidel Herrera was accused by both the PAN and his own Partido Revolucionario <unk> ( PRI ) of using state resources , including hurricane relief , to support the campaigns of PRI candidates . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 As the first Category 5 landfalling hurricane in 15 years , and due to its widespread impact , the name Dean was officially retired on May 13 , 2008 by the World Meteorological Organization during its annual meeting in Orlando , Florida , and will not be used for a future Atlantic hurricane . It was replaced by Dorian on List V of the Atlantic hurricane naming lists , which was used in the 2013 Atlantic hurricane season . 
 = = In Literature = = 
 Hurricane Dean featured prominently in the travel novel Chasing Dean by Welsh surf / travel writer Tom Anderson . The book is an account of surfing America 's hurricane states and the swell produced by Hurricane Dean . 
 = The Fountain = 
 The Fountain is a 2006 American epic drama film that blends elements of fantasy , history , spirituality , and science fiction . It is directed by Darren Aronofsky , and stars Hugh Jackman and Rachel Weisz . The film consists of three story lines , in which Jackman and Weisz play different sets of characters who may or may not be the same two people : a modern @-@ day scientist and his cancer @-@ stricken wife , a conquistador and his queen , and a space traveler in the future who hallucinates his lost love . The story lines — interwoven with use of match cuts and recurring visual motifs — reflect the themes of love and mortality . 
 Aronofsky originally planned to direct The Fountain on a $ 70 million budget with Brad Pitt and Cate Blanchett in the lead roles , but Pitt 's withdrawal and cost overruns led Warner Bros. to shut down production . The director rewrote the script to be sparser , and was able to resurrect the film with a $ 35 million budget with Jackman and Weisz in the lead roles . Production mainly took place on a sound stage in Montreal , Quebec , and the director used macro photography to create key visual effects for The Fountain at a low cost . 
 The film was released theatrically in the United States and Canada on November 22 , 2006 . It grossed $ 10 @,@ 144 @,@ 010 in the United States and Canada and $ 5 @,@ 761 @,@ 344 in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 15 @,@ 978 @,@ 422 . Critics ' reactions to the film were divided , but it has gained a large cult following since its release . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At its core , The Fountain is the story of a 21st @-@ century doctor , Tom Creo ( Hugh Jackman ) , losing his wife Izzi ( Rachel Weisz ) to cancer in 2005 . As she is dying , Izzi begs Tom to share what time they have left together , but he is focused on his quest to find a cure for her . 
 While he 's working in the lab , she writes a story about 16th century Queen Isabella losing her territory to the Inquisition while her betrothed , conquistador Tomás Verde plunges through the Central America forest in Mayan territory , searching for the Tree of Life for his Queen . 
 Since she does not have time herself , Izzi asks Tom to finish the story for her . As they look out to the stars , she imagines that their souls will meet there when the star dies . And we see space traveler Tommy , travelling there for the event , in a spaceship made of an enclosed biosphere containing the Tree of Life . 
 The three story lines are told <unk> , each separated by five centuries . The three periods are interwoven with match cuts and recurring visual motifs ; Hugh Jackman and Rachel Weisz play the main characters for all three narratives . Even within a given narrative , the elements of that particular story are not told in chronological order . 
 Whether these stories are actual events , or symbolic , is not clarified ; and , director Darren Aronofsky emphasized that the storylines in their time periods and their respective convergences were open to interpretation . The director has said of The Fountain 's intricacy and underlying message , " [ The film is ] very much like a Rubik 's Cube , where you can solve it in several different ways , but ultimately there 's only one solution at the end . " In a 2012 interview , Aronofsky stated that " ultimately the film is about coming to terms with your own death " . 
 = = = Tomás the conquistador = = = 
 The film opens with conquistador Tomás Verde in New Spain fighting a horde of Mayans to gain entry into a pyramid , where he is attacked by a Mayan priest with a flaming sword . Through flashbacks , it is revealed that the conquistador has been commissioned by Queen Isabella of Spain to travel to the New World in search of the Biblical Tree of Life . If Tomás can find it , she is convinced that she can put an end to the struggle between herself and an influential cleric during the Spanish Inquisition who is attempting to usurp the throne . Isabella vows to wed Tomás upon his return , citing a correlation with Adam and Eve . When Tomás arrives at his destination , he finds that his fellow knights are exhausted and refuse to continue searching for the Tree of Life . A Franciscan monk discovers the location of the temple , but is accidentally killed while Tomás represses the mutiny amongst his officers . As the priest dies , he gives Tomás a ceremonial dagger and directs him towards the pyramid . Once he arrives at the pyramid , Tomás and his men are ambushed and Tomás is captured . He is forced to the top of the pyramid , and engages in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat with a Mayan priest . Tomás is stabbed in the stomach , but just as the priest is about to kill him , a vision of Tommy appears before him . The priest believes Tomás is the " First Father " , apologizes and asks Tomás to sacrifice him by slitting his throat . Tomás kills the priest and proceeds to a garden with a large tree ; convinced this is the Tree of Life , Tomás applies some of its sap to his torso and is cured of his stab wound . He drinks the sap flowing from the bark . But in a reenactment of the Mayan creation myth told earlier in the film , flowers and grass burst forth from his body and he literally gives rise to new life . 
 = = = Tom the neuroscientist = = = 
 Tom Creo is a doctor working on a cure using samples of the " Tree of Life " , found through exploration in Central America , which are being tested for medicinal use for degenerative brain diseases in his lab in 2005 . He is motivated by his wife Izzi 's brain tumor , which has caused a rapid decline in her health . Izzi has used this time to assess the meaning of life and come to terms with her mortality , but Tom refuses to accept that she might die and has increasingly resolved to find a cure . She has written a book which apparently tells the story of Tomás the conquistador , but when she collapses at a museum , she becomes convinced that she won 't live long enough to finish the book and asks Tom to write the final chapter . She dies shortly thereafter and Tom dedicates himself to curing not only her disease , but death itself . His colleagues fear that this drive has made him reckless , but they try to support him emotionally at Izzi 's funeral . As a final act of love and devotion , Tom plants a sweetgum seed at Izzi 's grave in the manner of a story she told him relating how a Mayan guide 's dead father lived on in a tree nourished by the organic nutrients of the buried body . 
 = = = Tommy the space traveler = = = 
 The narrative for Tommy is set entirely in deep space in a small , self @-@ contained biosphere bubble . Jackman 's character in this plot is alone , flying in outer space toward the golden nebula of Xibalba with a large tree and a few personal effects inside his ship . While traveling , he meditates , performs t 'ai chi , grows mushrooms and cuts pieces of bark from the tree for nourishment . He also converses with apparitions of Izzi from 2005 . It is implied that the tree within the biosphere represents Izzi and that Tommy has been transporting it to Xibalba with the hope that her life will be restored . Tommy is also shown to have applied extensive , incremental tattooed patterns to both of his arms ; it is implied that the tattoos mark the passage of time on his journey . 
 At the climax of the film , to Tommy 's horror the tree suddenly dies . A final apparition of Izzi from 2005 appears , comforting Tommy in the face of his imminent death and suggesting that they may share an afterlife together . He finally understands and accepts his death , moments before the star goes supernova , engulfing the ship and everything within . The traveler 's body is incinerated , but the tree is brought flowering back to life . Izzi 's apparition picks a fruit from the new tree and hands it to Tom , the present @-@ day neuroscientist , who plants it in Izzi 's grave . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Darren Aronofsky described the core of the film as " a very simple love story " about a man and a woman in love , with the woman dying young . The director researched people who were dying young , and learned from doctors and caregivers that such patients find new ways of coping . Aronofsky observed that the patients often die more alone because their families cannot recognize what happens with them , calling it " an incredible tragedy " : 
 Instead of facing this tragedy in terror , she is coming to terms with what is happening to her ... Many patients actually start opening up to the possibility of what 's happening to them , but there 's very little vocabulary to help them deal ... We decided to expand it with this woman [ Izzi ] offering a gift to her husband of a metaphor that tells him where she 's come to . Hopefully through time he 'll be able to understand it and basically get where she is . 
 The Fountain 's theme of fear of death is " a movement from darkness into light , from black to white " that traces the journey of a man scared of death and moving toward it . The film begins with a paraphrase of Genesis 3 : 24 , the Biblical passage that reflects The Fall of Man . Hugh Jackman emphasized the importance of the Fall in the film : " The moment Adam and Eve ate of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil , humans started to experience life as we all experience it now , which is life and death , poor and wealthy , pain and pleasure , good and evil . We live in a world of duality . Husband , wife , we relate everything . And much of our lives are spent not wanting to die , be poor , experience pain . It 's what the movie 's about . " Aronofsky also interpreted the story of Genesis as the definition of mortality for humanity . He inquired of the Fall , " If they had drank from the Tree of Life [ instead of the Tree of Knowledge ] what would have separated them from their maker ? So what makes us human is actually death . It 's what makes us special . " 
 Aronofsky 's sensibility can be placed between Kubrick 's exploration of humanity , and Spielberg 's emotionality as he " combines elements of Kubrick ’ s excess visible in the human condition and leading us toward the limit of existence in obsession or madness , and of Spielberg ’ s emotion and the wish to leave a ray of hope , regardless of how hopeless the situation might be . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Director Darren Aronofsky sought to produce The Fountain after the release of Requiem for a Dream in 2000 . In April 2001 , he entered negotiations with Warner Bros. and Village Roadshow to direct the then @-@ untitled film with actor Brad Pitt in the lead role . Requiem for a Dream was screened for Pitt , and the preliminary script for The Fountain persuaded the actor to join the project . Aronofsky prepared for production by traveling with a crew to Central America to consult with Mayan experts and to explore the Mexican ruins of Palenque . The group also visited Tikal , a jungle location featured in the 1977 film Star Wars . In addition to the trip , the films Aguirre , the Wrath of God and The Holy Mountain were screened for the crew to inspire it in designing a rainforest set for The Fountain . In June 2001 , actress Cate Blanchett entered talks to join Aronofsky 's project . Aronofsky , who wanted the film 's actual title to be a secret , gave the project the working title of The Last Man . Production was postponed to improve the script and to wait for Blanchett , pregnant when she joined , to give birth to her child in December 2001 . The start date for production was tentatively set in summer 2002 . 
 In June 2002 , Warner Bros. met with Aronofsky and producer Eric Watson , expressing concerns over an escalating budget and threatening to cease the project unless a co @-@ financier was found . Watson petitioned independent production companies for support and was able to enlist Regency Enterprises for assistance . Production was ultimately set for late October 2002 in Queensland and Sydney , Australia . The film , officially titled The Fountain , was ' greenlit ' ( approved for production ) with a budget of $ 70 million , co @-@ financed by Warner Bros. and New Regency , who filled the gap after Village Roadshow withdrew from the project . Preparation for production of The Fountain cost $ 18 million . Abruptly , Pitt , whose requested screenplay revisions were not met , left the project seven weeks before the first day of shooting . The actor went on to star as Achilles in director Wolfgang Petersen 's Troy . With the studio threatening to shut down the project , Aronofsky sent the script to actor Russell Crowe as a potential replacement for Pitt . However , Crowe , worn out from recently completing Master and Commander : The Far Side of the World , declined . In September 2002 , Jeff Robinov , President of Production at Warner Bros. Pictures , announced that The Fountain would cease production , with Blanchett receiving compensation for her time and the Australian crew being fired from the halted project . Sets built for the production of the film , including a 10 @-@ story Mayan temple , were eventually auctioned off , in addition to props and other items . Pitt said that he was disappointed to leave and added , " I remain encouraged that The Fountain will yet have its day . " 
 Aronofsky began to develop other films . When he looked over the books he used to research for The Fountain , he decided to return to The Fountain , feeling closer to it creatively than the other possible projects . Without a studio and an actor , he decided to write a " no @-@ budget " version of the film , using his experiences filming Pi and Requiem for a Dream with small budgets . In February 2004 , Warner Bros. resurrected Aronofsky 's project and began to court actor Hugh Jackman to replace Pitt in the lead role . The film received a second greenlight with a budget of $ 35 million , in part because of the director 's willingness to leave costly set pieces out of the screenplay . In August , actress Rachel Weisz joined Hugh Jackman for the film , filling the vacancy left by Blanchett . Filming lasted 60 days in early 2005 and took place mainly on a sound stage in Montreal . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Darren Aronofsky and his friend Ari Handel created the story for The Fountain , and Aronofsky wrote the screenplay . When Aronofsky saw The Matrix in 1999 , he considered it a film that redefined the science fiction genre . He sought to make a science fiction film that would explore new territory in the genre like The Matrix and its predecessors Star Wars and 2001 : A Space Odyssey . Aronofsky had in mind a science fiction film that would go beyond the other films whose plots were driven by technology and science . The director said , " We 've seen it all . It 's not really interesting to audiences anymore . The interesting things are the ideas ; the search for God , the search for meaning . " 
 In 1999 , when Aronofsky turned 30 years old , his parents were diagnosed with cancer . He began reflecting on human mortality , " That was a really heavy @-@ duty emotional time . I know it 's a very young age , but turning thirty marks when your twenties are over and you could start considering , ' Wow , one of these days I 'm actually going to die . ' " While his parents overcame cancer , he began to focus on the concept of a young man saving a loved one from a life @-@ threatening disease . He shared the concept with Handel , his undergraduate school roommate at Harvard University . Handel earned a Ph.D in neuroscience from New York University but was uncertain about a future in neuroscience . He recalled the discussion , " Darren and I just started talking about the story . We kept wanting to talk more about it as the story kept getting bigger . I decided to make some life choices to continue working with Darren , because it was so much fun . " 
 The director relied on a change of locale to inspire him to write Pi and Requiem for a Dream . For The Fountain , Aronofsky was inspired by a research trip he took to Guatemala with Handel to learn about Mayan history and philosophy . The script for The Fountain was influenced by the accounts of Uruguayan journalist Eduardo Galeano , who wrote examples of myth from an indigenous perspective , particularly Galeano 's Genesis trilogy . The film Once Upon a Time in America also served as an influence on the script . Aronofsky , influenced by Bernal Díaz del Castillo 's The Conquest of New Spain , applied the narrative in writing the film 's conquistador scenes . 
 Aronofsky realized that since writing in 2000 the battle scene between the armies of Mayans and conquistadors , The Lord of the Rings film trilogy , Troy , King Arthur , and other films had featured massive battle scenes . He felt less inclined to mimic the scale and rewrote the battle to be mainly between Jackman 's conquistador character and the Mayans . The director realized that , with one man against the army , the rewrite was a suitable metaphor for his film 's theme of a man defying odds to do the impossible and conquer death . 
 The filmmakers researched space travel and Mayan culture , including its history , religion , and spirituality . They attended brain surgeries with the actors . With the research in place , Aronofsky said , " We decided which things we wanted to be purely factual and which things we wanted to bend . " The director did not strive to be historically accurate with the various time periods , perceiving the entire film as a setting of a fairy tale . He said , " It was more about painting a relationship between a queen and her warrior , and just using that for more fantasy reasons . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Aronofsky saw Hugh Jackman perform as Peter Allen in the Broadway musical The Boy from Oz and was impressed with his performance . The director met with Jackman , who sought " a role that could show a lot of dimension , " and cast him into the lead role in The Fountain . Jackman starred previously as the muscular character Wolverine in the X @-@ Men films , so for The Fountain , he exercised to adopt a slimmer figure . Jackman practiced t 'ai chi for seven months to demonstrate it in a 30 @-@ second scene . He also practiced yoga for over a year to achieve the lotus position for scenes set in space . For these scenes when he is seen in the position in mid @-@ air , he was immersed in a swimming pool and harnessed to a rig that rotated him 360 degrees so his clothes floated freely about him . 
 Jackman also watched a woman undergo brain tumor surgery and was shaken to see the woman have similar blond hair to his wife : " All I could think of was my wife on that table . As much as I 'd read the script and theorized and practiced philosophy , I knew in that moment that I was so not ready for death . " For his various characters , the actor assumed a different posture for each persona . As the conquistador , Jackman was upright and forward @-@ leaning to evoke an unstoppable nature . As the scientist , the actor hunched over with a dedicated focus on his character 's work , being weighed down by the " world on his shoulders . " As the space traveler , Jackman practiced the state of zen but also exhibited a continued persistence in his endeavor . 
 Jackman suggested that Aronofsky cast Rachel Weisz as his character 's wife . The director , who was in a relationship with the actress , had originally hesitated to show the studio signs of favoritism in casting Weisz . With Jackman 's earnest recommendation , the actress was cast as Izzi / Isabel . For her role , Weisz read books and first @-@ person accounts about people who had terminal illnesses . The actress also visited hospitals to see young people who were dying and under hospice care . " There were a few days where I was in the headspace where I could say : ' I could go now ' , " said Weisz . 
 The Fountain also stars Ellen Burstyn as Dr. Lillian <unk> , Tom 's superior , and Mark Margolis as Father Avila , who accompanies Tomás the conquistador . Burstyn and Margolis appeared in Aronofsky 's Requiem for a Dream , and the director wrote into the script roles for both of them . Sean Patrick Thomas , Donna Murphy , and Ethan <unk> were cast as assistants to Tom 's lab work . Cliff Curtis was cast as Captain Ariel , a fellow conquistador , and Stephen McHattie was cast as Grand Inquisitor <unk> , a religious fanatic who threatens the Spanish queen . Seventy extras were cast as Maya warriors , including twenty who had actual Guatemala Mayan backgrounds . One of the twenty , a real @-@ life spiritual leader , was cast as the Maya spiritual leader in the film . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The film 's locations , with the exception of scenes filmed at a museum and at a farmhouse , were built on the Montreal sound stage . Production designer James Chinlund and his crew built sets for The Fountain in a large warehouse in Montreal . The sets included the 16th century jungle settings and the bubble @-@ shaped spacecraft containing the tree of life and its garden . The spacecraft set was placed against greenscreen , and the crew hung colored reflective material , which included green , black , gold , and silver , on three circular tracks around the set . One material would be moved into place instead of the heavy equipment , and with the other materials partitioned off , a light source was used with the preferred material . Silver was used for scenes in which the spacecraft moved through the stars , and gold was used for when it entered the nebula . 
 In The Fountain , the Tree of Life was a central design and part of the film 's three periods . The tree was based on Kabbalah 's <unk> , which depicts a " map " of creation to understand the nature of God and how he created the world ex nihilo ( out of nothing ) . The <unk> Tree , being two to three hundred feet tall in lore , had to be resized for The Fountain to fit in the camera 's frame . Pieces of driftwood and pieces from real trees in Canada were collected for the tree 's branches and roots , and sculpted molds of the pieces were applied to a steel frame to create the tree 's body . According to production designer James Chinlund , the tree , part of an enormous set surrounded by green screens , and other sets presented difficult logistical problems because of the small budget given to the resurrected project . The tree set itself had been a collaboration between Chinlund , Aronofsky , and cinematographer Matthew Libatique to create the appropriate design , particularly the palette in comparison to the <unk> ship that carries the tree in the astronaut period . Aronofsky described the astronaut period as a homage to David Bowie 's " Space Oddity " ; the protagonist 's name " Tom " originating from the Major Tom of the popular song . Co @-@ writer Ari Handel researched <unk> , such as the Biosphere 2 , to help design the ship that carried the protagonist and the tree through space . With respect to the glass @-@ <unk> ship 's design , Aronofsky argued , " There is no reason a spaceship would be built like a giant truck in space . " 
 Aronofsky and cinematographer Matthew Libatique also discussed using a limited palette of colors , an approach that started with Aronofsky 's Pi and continued with Requiem for a Dream . In The Fountain , the primary colors are gold and white . Gold represents " the Mayans , a sort of fool 's gold , a false truth " ; Aronofsky explained the choice , " When you see gold , it represents materialism and wealth and all these things that distract us from the true journey that we 're on . " White was chosen to represent mortality and truth . Weisz 's characters are white , and wear white or are enveloped in white light to accentuate this presentation . Secondary colors are green , representing the color of life , and red , representing death . The director also used similar geometric constructs in the film to distinguish the three storylines . The 16th century conquistador 's tale reflected triangles through pyramids and constellations , the 21st century researcher 's period reflected rectangles through doors , windows , and computer screens , and the 26th century contemplative 's journey reflected circles and spheres through the spacecraft and stellar bodies . 
 = = = Cinematography = = = 
 Cinematographer Matthew Libatique shot The Fountain under Aronofsky 's direction . Libatique , who worked with Aronofsky throughout the 1990s , prepared for over a year for The Fountain when Aronofsky tried to produce the film for the first time . When production restarted on a smaller budget , Libatique felt that the more budget @-@ conscious approach resulted in a better film , " I think the streamlining of the film helped us tell the story more effectively . It 's been stripped down to its core , to what it 's really about : a search for immortality , when the truth of life is mortality . " 
 Aronofsky planned to have a strong presentation of the thematic movement from darkness into light . He originally sought to show only a silhouette of the man until the second of the film 's three acts , but he chose not to be so extreme , wanting to be more communicative to the audience . The movement was presented less aggressively in the film ; Jackman 's characters are seen in silhouette at the beginning , kept out of key light . In each of the three periods , the lighting on Jackman 's characters is initially dim and gradually grows brighter as the storylines unfold . Meanwhile , Weisz 's characters are frequently awash with light in the storylines . Libatique described the metaphoric change of the lighting on Jackman 's characters , " We follow the arc of the Thomas character as he gets closer and closer to the truth . " 
 Aronofsky preferred to use one camera whenever possible , only using a second camera if the scene was more about the setting and could be shot from two distinctly different axes . Libatique said Aronofsky preferred the eyeline match , " Darren is big on eyelines , and if you sacrifice an eyeline on an angle , he feels it nullifies the shot and de @-@ emphasizes the performances . " Aronofsky originally intended to have Jackman 's characters always moving in an " unusual " left @-@ to @-@ right direction across the frame , but the plan was complicated by the spacecraft needing to move upward toward a light source . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 When production restarted in 2005 , there was a more budget @-@ conscious approach to filming The Fountain , whose original budget was mostly intended for visual effects . Libatique reflected , " Visual effects comprised of a lot of the budget in the original conception . The popcorn moments were in there to justify the budget and bring target audiences into the theater . Ultimately , I think the streamlining of the film helped us tell the story more effectively . It 's been stripped down to the core , to what it 's really about : a search for immortality , when the truth of life is mortality . I think at the end of the day , the theme of the film will be easier to feel . " 
 To create a death scene , Aronofsky drew from Mayan mythology the description of flowers and butterflies emerging from the bodies of valiant warriors when they die . Aronofsky excluded butterflies from the death scene to minimize the film 's computer @-@ generated imagery but kept the effect of flowers bursting from the body . 
 Jeremy Dawson and Dan Schrecker , who had provided visual effects for Darren Aronofsky 's π and Requiem for a Dream , returned to The Fountain to help the director with the film 's effects . The pair was assigned the task of creating as little computer @-@ generated imagery as possible , a difficult task with a third of the film taking place in deep space . Aronofsky chose to avoid effects that would make the film look dated in several decades but instead hold up as well as a film like 2001 : A Space Odyssey . Dawson said , " Using CG is really the easy route because it 's so prevalent and the tools are great . What it did was really force us to come up with creative solutions to solve a lot of our problems . " 
 One creative solution was uncovering Peter Parks , a specialist in macro photography , who had retrieved deep @-@ sea microorganisms and photographed them in 3 @-@ D under partial funding from the Bahamas government . Parks brewed chemicals and bacteria together to create reactions that Schrecker and Dawson shot , recording 20 @,@ 000 feet worth of film over eight weeks . To create the effects , Peter Parks took advantage of fluid dynamics , which affected the behavior of the substances that he photographed . " When these images are projected on a big screen , you feel like you 're looking at infinity . That 's because the same forces at work in the water — gravitational effects , settlement , refractive indices — are happening in outer space , " Parks said . The specialist 's talent convinced the film 's creative department to go beyond computer @-@ generated imagery and follow Parks ' lead . Instead of millions of dollars for a single special effects sequence , Parks generated all the footage for the film for just $ 140 @,@ 000 . 
 The visual @-@ effects company Look Effects worked on 87 shots for The Fountain that included major set extensions , digital mattes , image enhancement , face replacement and blemish removal , as well as animating key elements to the film 's story . Henrik Fett , the visual effects supervisor of Look Effects , said , " Darren was quite clear on what he wanted and his intent to greatly minimize the use of computer graphics ... [ and ] I think the results are outstanding . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Clint Mansell — the composer for Aronofsky 's previous films Pi and Requiem for a Dream — reprised his role for The Fountain . The San Francisco @-@ based string quartet Kronos Quartet — who previously performed for the Requiem for a Dream soundtrack — and Scottish post @-@ rock band Mogwai also contributed to the film score . Mansell researched possible scores to compose one tying together the three storylines and sought to have an organic feeling to the score and explored implementing orchestral and electronic elements that would have " a real human element to them that breathes . " While reading the script , Mansell was reminded of the post @-@ rock music of Mogwai as well as Godspeed You ! Black Emperor and Sigur Rós and initially planned a score based around percussion before adding the string quartet and choir . The soundtrack was released by Nonesuch Records in 2006 and received numerous award nominations . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 When Warner Bros. shut down pre @-@ production of The Fountain in 2002 , Aronofsky reserved rights to publish a graphic novel based on the script that was not produced . He said , " I knew it was a hard film to make , and I said at least if Hollywood fucks me over at least I 'll make a comic book out of it . " He shopped the story to Vertigo Comics and met comic book artist Kent Williams , whose illustrations impressed him . Aronofsky hired Williams to create the graphic novel , and Ari Handel , co @-@ writer for the film , provided Williams with research , photographs , and images on " Mayans , astronomy , pulsars , and all kinds of cool stuff " for the graphic novel 's design . Aronofsky gave Williams the freedom to interpret the story as the artist saw fit . 
 The Fountain was originally scheduled to be released on October 13 , 2006 , but the film was delayed to create a " long @-@ lead campaign " and generate anticipation via word of mouth . The release date was ultimately set for November 22 , 2006 . Aronofsky shared his screenplay with eleven artists : Phil Hale , Martin Wilner , Jason Shawn Alexander , Kostas <unk> , Dave Gibbons , Barron Storey , James Jean , Jim Lee , Olivier <unk> , Seth Fisher , and Bill Sienkiewicz . He invited them to interpret the screenplay in each one 's chosen medium , and the interpretations were intended to be available on the film 's website . Aronofsky also published a book about the film that contained production stills , the original script , original art , and observations by the film 's creators . The content and research agency Ramp Industry launched The Fountain Remixed , an official website driven by user @-@ generated content . Users could download freely provided audio parts from The Fountain 's film score , remix the music , and upload the work onto the website to be evaluated by other users . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film had its world premiere at the 63rd Venice Film Festival on September 2 , 2006 . Several critics booed The Fountain at the festival 's press screening , while the film received a 10 @-@ minute standing ovation at the public screening the following evening . The Fountain was released in 1 @,@ 472 theaters in the United States and Canada on November 22 , 2006 , a day before the American Thanksgiving holiday . The film earned $ 3 @,@ 768 @,@ 702 in the U.S. and Canadian box office during the opening weekend of November 24 . The Fountain earned $ 10 @,@ 144 @,@ 010 in the United States and Canada , and $ 5 @,@ 761 @,@ 344 in other territories . The film , which had a production budget of $ 35 million , grossed $ 15 @,@ 978 @,@ 422 in theaters worldwide . The box @-@ office performance was considered a flop with the film only earning back 54 % of its budget . 
 The review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 51 % of 187 critics gave the film positive reviews and that it got a rating average of 5 @.@ 9 out of 10 . At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the film received an average score of 51 based on 36 reviews . Rotten Tomatoes reported of the critics ' consensus that the movie , " about metaphysics , universal patterns , Biblical symbolism , and boundless love spread across one thousand years — is visually rich but suffers from its own unfocused ambitions . " Newsweek reported how people received the film , " Its supporters admire the film 's beauty and daring ; its detractors find it overblown and hokey . " 
 Michael Atkinson , writing for Sight & Sound , reviewed Aronofsky 's endeavor , " It 's difficult to recall another American film that , in pursuing a passionate and personal vision , goes so maddeningly , uproariously wrong . " Atkinson said of the narrative , " The erratic and pointless leapfrogging between its storylines is <unk> ... all three stories are assembled piecemeal , many of which repeat over and over as flashback and flashforwards . " He complained of the numerous motifs , " It 's difficult to swallow the amalgamation of Mayan , Biblical , Buddhist , Taoist and New Age iconography , all of it tossed as if into a stew . " In contrast , Glenn Kenny of Premiere wrote of the film , " The Fountain is probably the <unk> stories @-@ within @-@ stories narrative film I 've seen ... By The Fountain 's end , the multilayered meta @-@ narrative ... resolves ( or does it ? ) into a kind of diegetic Möbius strip , to stunning effect . " Kenny called the film " as demanding as it is dazzling " and compared Aronofsky 's direction to Stanley Kubrick 's " in terms of conceptual audacity and meticulousness of execution . " He concluded , " It 's a movie that 's as deeply felt as it is imagined . " 
 Anthony Lane , reviewing for The New Yorker , called The Fountain " a gorgeous nimbus of confusion . " Lane complained about the film 's up @-@ close and far @-@ away shots , " What fails to concern or attract Aronofsky is the place where most of us hang out — the in @-@ between , the <unk> of everyday existence . " He summarized , " The movie may have significant truths to impart , although I have my doubts , but it feels too inexperienced , too unworldly , to have earned the right to them . " Roger Ebert , who admired Aronofsky 's previous films , conceded in the Chicago Sun @-@ Times that The Fountain was " not a great success . " He identified the film 's issues : " too many screens of blinding lights , " " too many transitions for their own sake , " and " abrupt changes of tone . " He believed that the scaling down of the film from Aronofsky 's original ambition lost some elements and anticipated a director 's cut truer to Aronofsky 's vision . 
 In 2009 , Aronofsky reflected on the reception of The Fountain , " There are a lot of Fountain @-@ haters out [ at the Venice Film Festival ] . The film 's about the fact that it 's OK that we die , and we should come to terms with it . But many , many people don 't want to think about that , so why pay money for a meditation on losing someone you love ? Everything about western culture denies that . " He also believed the film was released at the wrong time , " It was pre @-@ Obama , smack in the middle of Paris Hilton time . But there has been a serious turn now , people are starting to realise that the party 's over , finally . So we can stop thinking about the culture of superficiality , start to remember there are other things going on . " 
 In the book Positive Psychology at the Movies : Using Films to Build Virtues and Character <unk> , Ryan M. Niemiec and Danny Wedding cite the film as one which depicts the development of perspective . " [ Jackman 's character 's ] denial and work addiction are obstacles to the development of the strength of perspective , but he is able to confront those obstacles as he develops acceptances and wisdom , represented by themes drawn from both Buddhism ( meditation , rebirth , reincarnation ) and Christianity ( eternal life , faith , and love ) . " 
 It was listed as number 484 on Empire 's 500 Greatest films of all time . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Fountain was released on DVD , HD DVD , and Blu @-@ ray in the United States on May 15 , 2007 . The included extras were the theatrical trailer and a six @-@ part featurette gallery about the film 's periods and settings . Aronofsky was disappointed with the limited extras available on home video . He reported that Warner Bros. did not want to have the director record a commentary track because it felt the commentary would not help sales . He hoped to petition for the film to be re @-@ released in the Criterion Collection with extras that were not made available on the initial media . Aronofsky recorded a commentary track on his own and made the track available on his personal website . In December 2008 , he expressed interest in reassembling The Fountain , not as a director 's cut , but as an alternate story that combined theatrical footage and unused footage . 
 = Willie Mitchell ( ice hockey ) = 
 William Reid Mitchell ( born April 23 , 1977 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey defenceman who is currently an unrestricted free agent who most recently served as captain of the Florida Panthers of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He is known primarily as a physical defensive defenceman . Mitchell played Junior A in the British Columbia Hockey League ( BCHL ) and Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League ( SJHL ) before joining the college ranks with the Clarkson Knights of ECAC Hockey in 1997 . He won an ECAC championship with Clarkson in 1999 , while also earning playoff MVP and ECAC First Team All @-@ Star honours . 
 Selected by the New Jersey Devils in the 1996 NHL Entry Draft , he played two seasons with the Albany River Rats of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) while earning limited playing time with the Devils over two seasons . In 2001 , he was traded to the Minnesota Wild where he played four seasons before a brief stint with the Dallas Stars . He signed with the Vancouver Canucks in the 2006 off @-@ season and was named the team 's top defenceman twice , in 2008 and 2009 . After four seasons in Vancouver , Mitchell signed with the Los Angeles Kings in August 2010 . While with Los Angeles , Mitchell won two Stanley Cups ( 2012 and 2014 ) before signing with the Florida Panthers in the 2014 off @-@ season . 
 Internationally , he has represented Team Canada once at the 2004 World Championships , capturing a gold medal . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mitchell was born on April 23 , 1977 , to Reid and <unk> Mitchell . He has a sister named Chantal . His father works as a heavy @-@ duty mechanic with Western Forest Products , while his mother is a Croatian @-@ born immigrant who works as a terminal service agent for B.C. Ferries . Mitchell 's grandfather , Les Mitchell , played amateur senior hockey and once earned a tryout with the New York Rangers during the Original Six @-@ era . 
 Mitchell was born and raised in Port McNeill , British Columbia , a small logging town on Vancouver Island . He grew up working on the docks in his hometown unloading fish and cleaning equipment . He first began skating at the age of four and took figure skating . Growing up as a Vancouver Canucks fan , his father would take him across to the mainland to see games at the Pacific Coliseum . He played minor hockey as a winger with the North Island Eagles and won back @-@ to @-@ back double @-@ A provincial titles in pee wee and bantam with the club . At the age of 15 , he left home after being recruited to play for Athol Murray College of Notre Dame , a high school in Wilcox , Saskatchewan . It was there that he switched from wing to defence . He played with the Notre Dame Hounds ' midget team of the Saskatchewan Midget Hockey League ( <unk> ) and recorded 15 points over 31 games in 1993 – 94 . From there , he earned an athletic scholarship with Clarkson University in Potsdam , New York . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior and college hockey ( 1994 – 99 ) = = = 
 As a junior hockey player , Mitchell began in the BCHL with the Kelowna Spartans in 1994 – 95 , recording 11 points over 42 games . After one season with Kelowna , he joined the Melfort Mustangs of the SJHL . Following his first season with Melfort in 1995 – 96 , he was selected by the New Jersey Devils in the eighth round , 199th overall , in the 1996 NHL Entry Draft . He returned to Melfort for a second season and recorded 56 points in 64 games to earn the Top Defenceman Award and SJHL First All @-@ Star Team honours . 
 Beginning in 1997 – 98 , Mitchell began two seasons of college hockey with Clarkson University Golden Knights of the ECAC . In his freshman year , he recorded 26 points over 34 games , fourth among league defencemen , and was named co @-@ Rookie of the Year with Clarkson teammate Erik Cole . He also earned ECAC All @-@ Rookie and ECAC Second All @-@ Star honours . Clarkson advanced to the ECAC Tournament Final against Princeton University , but lost 5 – 4 in double overtime . The following season , Mitchell led all Golden Knights defencemen in scoring with 29 points ( 10 goals and 19 assists ) and a + 13 rating in 34 games . He finished the season with a league player of the week recognition on March 1 , 1999 . As Clarkson met <unk> in the 1999 ECAC Semi @-@ final , Mitchell scored the game winning goal with a slap shot from centre ice with three seconds remaining in regulation . Clarkson went on to defeat St. Lawrence University 3 – 2 in the final to capture the ECAC championship . Mitchell earned tournament MVP honours and was also named to the ECAC First All @-@ Star Team and NCAA East Second All @-@ American Team . 
 = = = New Jersey Devils ( 1999 – 2001 ) = = = 
 Following his sophomore season with Clarkson , Mitchell decided to forgo his final two seasons of college eligibility to turn professional in the New Jersey Devils system . He played the final six games of the 1998 – 99 AHL season with the Devils ' minor league affiliate , the Albany River Rats , registering a goal and three assists . 
 In his first Devils ' training camp in September 1999 , he broke a finger in his left hand during a fight in a rookie game against the Boston Bruins . The injury required three pins to set the finger in place . Although sidelined , the Devils signed him to a rookie contract in September 1999 . After recovering , he was assigned to the River Rats . Mitchell received a call @-@ up late in the season and made his NHL debut on March 27 , 2000 , in a 5 – 2 loss to the Toronto Maple Leafs . He stayed with the Devils for a week before being returned to the AHL . He finished the 1999 – 2000 season with 19 points over 63 games with the River Rats and no points in two games with the Devils . 
 The following season , Mitchell made the Devils ' opening lineup , but was a regular healthy scratch . After appearing in 11 games , he was returned to the AHL on November 22 , 2000 . He registered his first NHL point , an assist , during his initial stint . After injuries to Devils defencemen Scott Niedermayer and Brian Rafalski , Mitchell was recalled on February 10 , 2001 . The following month , after having been sent back down to the AHL , he was traded to the Minnesota Wild on March 4 , 2001 , in exchange for defenceman Sean O 'Donnell . 
 = = = Minnesota Wild and Dallas Stars ( 2001 – 06 ) = = = 
 Following the trade , Mitchell became a full @-@ time NHLer , playing in 17 games with the Wild to finish the season . He completed his rookie NHL season with a goal and 10 assists over 33 games between the Devils and Wild . In his first full season with the Wild in 2001 – 02 , he recorded three goals and 13 points in 68 games , while earning $ 550 @,@ 000 from his initial rookie contract with the Devils . He missed 14 games due to three separate shoulder , groin and wrist injuries . Establishing himself as a top @-@ four defenceman on the team , paired with Brad <unk> , Mitchell ranked third on the team in average ice time with 21 : 25 minutes per game . The following season , he improved to a third @-@ ranked plus @-@ 13 on the team after going – 16 the previous season . He went on to help the club make a run in the 2003 playoffs to the semi @-@ finals , leading the team with a + 5 rating in 18 post @-@ season games . He suffered a cheekbone injury during the first round against the Colorado Avalanche that required him to wear a fully <unk> helmet for the remainder of the playoffs . After defeating the Avalanche and Vancouver Canucks in the first two rounds , the Wild were eliminated in four games by the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim in the semi @-@ finals . 
 In the off @-@ season , he was re @-@ signed to a one @-@ year contract by the Wild on August 11 , 2003 . He recorded 14 points over 70 games in 2003 – 04 , while leading the Wild with a + 12 rating and ranking second in average ice time at 22 : 35 minutes per game . Minnesota failed to qualify for the playoffs . 
 On June 30 , 2004 , the Wild tendered Mitchell a qualifying offer , but he later filed for arbitration on July 7 . The two sides avoided arbitration by agreeing on a one @-@ year , $ 1 @.@ 775 million deal on August 12 , 2004 . However , due to the NHL lockout , Mitchell was inactive in 2004 – 05 . With NHL play set to resume for 2005 – 06 , he re @-@ signed with the Wild to another one @-@ year , $ 1 million contract on August 9 , 2005 . In December 2005 , he was named team captain as part of the Wild 's monthly rotating captaincy ( he was then succeeded by Brian Rolston in February 2006 ) . 
 At the 2005 – 06 NHL trade deadline , Mitchell was traded away to the Dallas Stars as a rental player in exchange for defencemen Martin <unk> and Shawn Belle on March 9 , 2006 . Mitchell closed the season playing 16 games and one playoff round with Dallas before becoming an unrestricted free agent in the off @-@ season . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks ( 2006 – 2010 ) = = = 
 On July 1 , 2006 , the Vancouver Canucks signed Mitchell to a four @-@ year , $ 14 million contract . Canucks General Manager Dave Nonis had previously attempted to acquire him at the previous season 's trade deadline before he was sent to Dallas . His acquisition as a free agent followed the signings of goaltender Roberto Luongo and Head Coach Alain Vigneault , which reflected an effort from Nonis to develop a defence @-@ first system . 
 Early in the 2006 – 07 season , Mitchell suffered a concussion on October 23 and missed nine games . He then missed 11 more games due to a recurring groin injury in February and March 2007 . He finished his first season with the Canucks recording a goal and 11 points in 62 games . His 4 : 57 minutes of average shorthanded ice time per game ranked third in the NHL behind <unk> Hatcher and Adam Foote . He helped the team to the second round of the 2007 playoffs , where they were defeated by the Anaheim Ducks in five games . 
 During his second season with Vancouver , he missed ten games with a fractured vertebra . The injury was sustained on December 31 , 2007 , in a loss to the Calgary Flames , while trying to dodge a check . However , Mitchell continued to play with the injury for nine games afterwards . He recorded two goals and 12 points , while leading the team with 108 blocked shots and 1 @,@ 646 : 20 minutes in total ice time . At the end of the 2007 – 08 season , he was awarded his first Babe Pratt Trophy as the Canucks ' top defenceman . 
 With the departure of long @-@ time Canucks captain Markus Näslund to free agency in the 2008 off @-@ season , Mitchell was considered a leading candidate for captaincy . The Canucks instead appointed team MVP Roberto Luongo as the first goaltender to be a captain since 1947 – 48 on September 30 , 2008 . Mitchell was named alternate captain along with forward Ryan Kesler and defenceman Mattias Öhlund . Due to Luongo 's limitations as a goaltender , Mitchell was designated the captain 's traditional role of disputing calls by the officials and relaying messages to the coach . 
 During the subsequent 2008 – 09 season , Mitchell recorded career @-@ highs with three goals , 20 assists , 23 points and a team @-@ best + 29 rating , earning his second consecutive Babe Pratt Trophy . He added two assists and led all Canucks in average ice time at 24 : 12 minutes per game in the post @-@ season . He helped the Canucks advance to the second round , where they were eliminated by the Chicago Blackhawks in six games . 
 Early on in the 2009 – 10 season , Mitchell delivered an open @-@ ice hit that concussed Blackhawks captain Jonathan Toews in the two teams ' first game against each other since the 2009 playoffs . Mitchell had just exited the penalty box when he caught Toews with his head down receiving a pass in the neutral zone ; the hit was deemed legal as Mitchell checked Toews with his shoulder . Toews was sidelined for six games as a result . Later on in the season , Mitchell suffered a concussion himself , receiving a hit from opposing forward Evgeni Malkin , causing his head to hit the end boards , during a game against the Pittsburgh Penguins on January 16 . He was sidelined for the remainder of the season with post @-@ concussion syndrome , finishing with 12 points and a + 13 rating in 48 games . 
 Unsure if the injury had ended his career , Mitchell later recalled his subsequent recovery as " the toughest year of [ his ] life . " Not speaking to the media until after the Canucks were eliminated in the playoffs , he expressed criticism towards both Malkin for the hit resulting in his concussion and to NHL Senior Vice President Colin Campbell for not taking any disciplinary action . He denounced Campbell for being " inconsistent ... hand [ ing ] down suspensions and fines on result [ instead of the nature of a hit ] , " as Mitchell 's injury was not immediately apparent following the game . 
 Mitchell 's four @-@ year deal with the Canucks expired on July 1 , 2010 , and he became an unrestricted free agent . Mitchell was still involved in negotiations with Vancouver to re @-@ sign , but concerns over his head injury , as well as the new defensive acquisitions of Keith Ballard and Dan Hamhuis in the off @-@ season factored against the possibility of remaining with the Canucks . 
 = = = Los Angeles Kings ( 2010 – 2014 ) = = = 
 On August 25 , 2010 , Mitchell signed a two @-@ year deal worth $ 3 @.@ 5 million per season with the Los Angeles Kings . He had interest from several other teams , including the Washington Capitals and San Jose Sharks . The Canucks were also offering a one @-@ year contract between $ 1 @.@ 8 and $ 2 million , but were not willing to match the Kings ' deal . Mitchell expressed disappointment in leaving the Canucks , but stated he was " looking forward to going to a team which , I get the feeling , is really passionate about having me there . " 
 Mitchell began the season on a defensive pairing with Drew Doughty . Nearly a month into the campaign , he notched his first goal as a King , scoring short handed against the Dallas Stars in a 5 – 2 victory on October 28 , 2010 . In November 2010 , he sustained a wrist injury during a game against the Nashville Predators , sidelining him for 12 games . After recovering , he suffered a knee injury , keeping him from another 11 games . Later in the season , during a game against the Phoenix Coyotes , on March 3 , 2011 , Mitchell was hit in the face by a shot from opposing forward Kyle Turris , requiring 53 stitches . He did not miss any additional games , however . Mitchell finished the season with five goals and five assists over 57 games , ranking third in average ice time per contest with the Kings . He added a goal and an assist in six playoff games as the Kings were eliminated by the San Jose Sharks in the first round . On February 24 , 2012 , Mitchell signed a two @-@ year contract extension with the Kings . In the 2012 playoffs , Mitchell helped the Kings defeat the Vancouver Canucks in the first round , the St. Louis Blues in the semi @-@ finals ( winning four games straight ) and the Phoenix Coyotes in the Conference Finals . The Kings made the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time since 1993 and defeated the New Jersey Devils ; this also marked Mitchell 's first appearance in the Stanley Cup Final . Mitchell was the second player , after team captain Dustin Brown , to hoist the Cup after the win . 
 During the 2012 – 13 NHL lockout , Mitchell began having knee problems , requiring a first surgery to clean up debris and a second surgery after re @-@ injuring the knee during rehabilitation prior to the 2012 – 13 King 's training camp . Mitchell was out for the remainder of the 2012 – 13 season and questionable for the 2013 – 14 season . 
 Mitchell did return alongside Slava <unk> in the 2013 – 14 season . Mitchell missed a handful of games in the second round of the 2014 Stanley Cup playoffs due to an injury , but returned to beat the Chicago Blackhawks in the Western Conference Finals and win his second Stanley Cup over the New York Rangers . 
 = = = Florida Panthers ( 2014 – 2016 ) = = = 
 With the Kings facing cap constraints , Mitchell was not retained as a free agent . On July 1 , 2014 , he signed a two @-@ year $ 8 @.@ 5 million contract with the Florida Panthers . On October 6 , 2014 , Mitchell was named the eighth captain in Florida Panthers history . 
 = = International play = = 
 Mitchell has made one international appearance for Canada in his career . After the Minnesota Wild failed to qualify for the 2004 playoffs , he was named to the national team for the 2004 World Championships in the Czech Republic . He was joined on the squad by Wild teammate Nick Schultz in the first group of players chosen by General Manager Jim <unk> on April 5 , 2004 . Appearing in nine games , Mitchell helped Canada to a gold medal , defeating Sweden 5 – 3 in the final . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Mitchell plays in the style of a stay @-@ at @-@ home defenceman . While with the Vancouver Canucks , he established himself as their top shutdown defenceman , being matched up against opposing teams ' best players and spending significant time on the penalty kill . He had usually formed a defensive pairing on the Canucks with the often offensive @-@ minded Kevin Bieksa . Bieksa has credited Mitchell with teaching him to be more aware of game situations before jumping into the rush . 
 In order to defend effectively , Mitchell opts to use a longer @-@ than @-@ usual hockey stick . Prior to a game against the Calgary Flames on February 17 , 2009 , opposing Head Coach Mike Keenan accused Mitchell of playing with an illegal hockey stick . Mitchell responded by asserting he uses the League maximum length at 63 inches . 
 Mitchell is also known for his leadership qualities , serving as an alternate captain on the Canucks . During his tenure with the Minnesota Wild , he was named captain once for the months of December 2005 and January 2006 as part of the Wild 's rotating captaincy system . At the start of the 2014 – 15 season , Mitchell was also named the captain of the Florida Panthers . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Mitchell married Minnesota @-@ native Megan on August 17 , 2006 , in Napa Valley , California . They reside in the Yaletown neighbourhood in downtown Vancouver , while returning to Mitchell 's hometown of Port McNeill during the summer , where he fishes avidly . 
 Mitchell is an active philanthropist around the Port McNeill community . In 2004 , he hosted the first Willie Mitchell Classic , a celebrity golf tournament to raise scholarship funds for high school students around his hometown . He has also regularly donated game @-@ used equipment to fundraise for his former minor hockey team , the North Island Eagles . 
 In the summer of 2009 , Mitchell threw the first pitch at a Seattle Mariners game against the Toronto Blue Jays at Safeco Field in Seattle , Washington . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = SJHL = = = 
 = = = College = = = 
 = = = NHL = = = 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks = = = 
 = English Poor Laws = 
 The English Poor Laws were a system of poor relief which existed in England and Wales that developed out of late @-@ medieval and Tudor @-@ era laws being codified in 1587 – 98 . The Poor Law system was in existence until the emergence of the modern welfare state after the Second World War . 
 English Poor Law legislation can be traced back as far as 1536 , when legislation was passed to deal with the impotent poor , although there is much earlier Tudor legislation dealing with the problems caused by vagrants and beggars . The history of the Poor Law in England and Wales is usually divided between two statutes , the Old Poor Law passed during the reign of Elizabeth I and the New Poor Law , passed in 1834 , which significantly modified the existing system of poor relief . The later statute altered the Poor Law system from one which was administered haphazardly at a local parish level to a highly centralised system which encouraged the large @-@ scale development of workhouses by Poor Law Unions . 
 The Poor Law system fell into decline at the beginning of the 20th century owing to factors such as the introduction of the Liberal welfare reforms and the availability of other sources of assistance from friendly societies and trade unions , as well as piecemeal reforms which bypassed the Poor Law system . The Poor Law system was not formally abolished until the National Assistance Act 1948 , with parts of the law remaining on the books until 1967 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Medieval Poor Laws = = = 
 The earliest medieval Poor Law was the Ordinance of Labourers which was issued by King Edward III of England on 18 June 1349 , and revised in 1350 . The ordinance was issued in response to the 1348 – 1350 outbreak of the Black Death in England , when an estimated 30 – 40 % of the population had died . The decline in population left surviving workers in great demand in the agricultural economy of Britain . Landowners had to face the choice of raising wages to compete for workers or letting their lands go unused . Wages for labourers rose , and this forced up prices across the economy as goods became more expensive to produce . An attempt to rein in prices , the ordinance ( and subsequent acts , such the Statute of Labourers of 1351 ) required that everyone who could work did ; that wages were kept at pre @-@ plague levels and that food was not overpriced . Workers saw these shortage conditions as an opportunity to flee employers and become freemen , so Edward III passed additional laws to punish escaped workers . In addition , the Statute of Cambridge was passed in 1388 and placed restrictions on the movement of labourers and beggars . 
 = = = Tudor Poor Law = = = 
 The origins of the English Poor Law system can be traced as far back as late medieval statutes dealing with beggars and vagrancy but it was only during the Tudor period that the Poor Law system became codified . Monasteries , the primary source of poor relief , were dissolved by the Tudors Reformation causing poor relief to move from a largely voluntary basis to a compulsory tax that was collected at a parish level . Early legislation was concerned with vagrants and making the able @-@ bodied work , especially while labour was in short supply following the Black Death . 
 Tudor attempts to tackle the problem originate during the reign of Henry VII . In 1495 , Parliament passed the Vagabonds and Beggars Act ordering that " vagabonds , idle and suspected persons shall be set in the stocks for three days and three nights and have none other sustenance but bread and water and then shall be put out of Town . Every beggar suitable to work shall resort to the Hundred where he last dwelled , is best known , or was born and there remain upon the pain aforesaid . " No remedy to the problem of poverty was offered by this ; it was merely swept from sight , or moved from town to town . Moreover , no distinction was made between vagrants and the jobless ; both were simply categorised as " sturdy beggars " , to be punished and moved on . 
 In 1530 , during the reign of Henry VIII , a proclamation was issued , describing idleness as the " mother and root of all vices " and ordering that whipping should replace the stocks as the punishment for vagabonds . This change was confirmed in the 1531 Vagabonds Act the following year , with one important change : it directed the justices of the peace to assign to the impotent poor an area within which they are to beg . Generally , the licences to beg for the impotent poor were limited to the disabled , sick , and elderly . An impotent person begging out of his area was to be imprisoned for two days and nights in the stocks , on bread and water , and then sworn to return to the place in which he was authorized to beg . An able @-@ bodied beggar was to be whipped , and sworn to return to the place where he was born , or last dwelt for the space of three years , and there put himself to labour . Still no provision was made , though , for the healthy man simply unable to find work . All able @-@ bodied unemployed were put into the same category . Those unable to find work had a stark choice : starve or break the law . In 1535 , a bill was drawn up calling for the creation of a system of public works to deal with the problem of unemployment , to be funded by a tax on income and capital . A law passed a year later allowed vagabonds to be whipped . 
 In London , there was a great massing of the poor , and the Reformation threatened to eliminate some of the infrastructure used to provide for the poor . As a result , King Henry VIII consented to re @-@ endow St. Bartholomew 's Hospital in 1544 and St. Thomas ’ Hospital in 1552 on the condition that the citizens of London pay for their maintenance . However , the city was unable to raise enough revenue from voluntary contributions , so it instituted the first definite compulsory Poor Rate in 1547 which replaced Sunday collections in Church with a mandatory collection for the poor . In 1555 , London became increasingly concerned with the number of poor who could work , but yet could not find work , so it established the first House of Correction ( predecessor to the workhouse ) in the King ’ s Palace at Bridewell where poor could receive shelter and work at cap @-@ making , feather @-@ bed making , and wire drawing . 
 For the able @-@ bodied poor , life became even tougher during the reign of Edward VI . In 1547 , the Vagabonds Act was passed that subjected vagrants to some of the more extreme provisions of the criminal law , namely two years servitude and branding with a " V " as the penalty for the first offence and death for the second . Justices of the Peace were reluctant to apply the full <unk> in 1552 , Edward VI passed a poor act which designated a position of " Collector of Alms " in each parish and created a register of licensed poor . Under the assumption that parish collections would now relieve all poor , begging was completely prohibited . 
 The government of Elizabeth I , Edward VI 's successor after Mary I , was also inclined to severity . An Act passed in 1572 called for offenders to be burned through the ear for a first offence and that persistent beggars should be hanged . However , the Act also made the first clear distinction between the " professional beggar " and those unemployed through no fault of their own . Early in her reign , Elizabeth I also passed laws directly aimed at providing relief for the poor . For example , in 1563 , her Act for the Relief of the Poor required all parish residents with ability to pay to contribute to poor collections . Those who “ of his or their forward willful mind shall obstinately refuse to give weekly to the relief of the poor according to his or their abilities ” could be bound over to justices of the peace and fined £ 10 . Additionally , the 1572 Vagabonds Act further enabled Justices of the Peace to survey and register the impotent poor , determine how much money was required for their relief , then assess parish residents weekly for the appropriate amount . Her 1575 Poor Act required towns to create “ a competent stock of wool , hemp , flax , iron and other stuff ” for the poor to work on and houses of correction for those who refused to work where recalcitrant or careless workers could be forced to work and punished accordingly . 
 The first complete code of poor relief was made in the Act for the Relief of the Poor 1597 and some provision for the " deserving poor " was eventually made in the Elizabethan Poor Law of 1601 . The more immediate origins of the Elizabethan Poor Law system were deteriorating economic circumstances in sixteenth @-@ century England . Historian George Boyer has stated that England suffered rapid inflation at this time caused by population growth , the debasement of coinage and the inflow of American silver . Poor harvests in the period between 1595 and 1598 causing the numbers in poverty to increase while charitable giving decreased after the dissolution of the Monasteries and religious guilds . 
 = = = A new colonial solution = = = 
 In the early 1580s , with the development of English colonization schemes , initially in Ireland and later in North America , a new method to alleviate the condition of the poor would be suggested and utilized considerably over time . Merchant and colonization proponent , George Peckham noted the then @-@ current domestic conditions ; " there are at this day great numbers which Hue in such <unk> & want , as they could be content to hazard their Hues , and to <unk> one yeere for meat , <unk> and apparell only , without wages , in hope thereby to amend their estates . " With this , he may have been the first to suggest what became the institution of indentured service . At the same time Richard Hakluyt , in his preface to Divers Voyages , likens English planters to " Bees ... led out by their <unk> to <unk> abroad " ; he recommends " deducting " the poor out of the realm . Hakluyt also broadens the scope and additionally recommends to empty the prisons and send them off to the New World . By 1619 Virginia 's system of indentured service would be fully developed , and subsequent colonies would adopt the method with modifications suitable to their different conditions and times . English penal transportation would be implemented soon after , and evolve into a subsidized government endeavor with the Transportation Act 1717 . 
 = = = Old Poor Law = = = 
 The Elizabethan Poor Law of 1601 formalized earlier practices of poor relief contained in the Act for the Relief of the Poor 1597 yet is often cited as the beginning of the Old Poor Law system . It created a system administered at parish level , paid for by levying local rates on rate payers . Relief for those too ill or old to work , the so @-@ called ' impotent poor ' , was in the form of a payment or items of food ( ' the parish loaf ' ) or clothing also known as outdoor relief . Some aged people might be accommodated in parish alms houses , though these were usually private charitable institutions . Meanwhile , able @-@ bodied beggars who had refused work were often placed in Houses of Correction or even subjected to beatings to mend their attitudes . Provision for the many able @-@ bodied poor in the workhouse , was relatively unusual , and most workhouses developed later . The 1601 Law said that parents and children were responsible for each other , elderly parents would live with their children . 
 The Old Poor Law was a parish based system , there were around 15 @,@ 000 such parishes based upon the area around a parish church . The system allowed for despotic behavior from the Overseers of the Poor but as Overseers of the Poor would know their paupers they were considered able to differentiate between the deserving and undeserving poor making the system both more humane and initially more efficient . The Elizabethan Poor Law operated at a time when the population was small enough for everyone to know everyone else , therefore people 's circumstances would be known and the idle poor would be unable to claim on the parishes ' poor rate . The system provided social stability yet by 1750 needed to be adapted to cope with population increases , greater mobility and regional price variations . 
 The 1601 Act sought to deal with ' settled ' poor who had found themselves temporarily out of work — it was assumed they would accept indoor relief or outdoor relief . Neither method of relief was at this time in history seen as harsh . The act was supposed to deal with beggars who were considered a threat to civil order . The Act was passed at a time when poverty was considered necessary as fear of poverty made people work . In 1607 a House of Correction was set up in each county . However , this system was separate from the 1601 system which distinguished between the settled poor and ' vagrants ' . There was much variation in the application of the law and there was a tendency for the destitute to migrate towards the more generous parishes , usually situated in the towns . This led to the Settlement Act 1662 also known as the Poor Relief Act 1662 , this allowed relief only to established residents of a parish ; mainly through birth , marriage and apprenticeship . Unfortunately the laws reduced the mobility of labour and discouraged paupers from leaving their parish to find work . They also encouraged industry to create short contracts ( e.g. 364 days ) so that an employee could not become eligible for poor relief . 
 A pauper applicant had to prove a settlement . If they could not they were removed to the parish that was nearest to their place of birth , or where they might prove some connection ; some paupers were moved hundreds of miles . Although the parishes they passed through en route had no responsibility for them , they were supposed to supply food and drink and shelter for at least one night . In 1697 an act was passed requiring those who begged to wear a " badge " of red or blue cloth on the right shoulder with an embroidered letter " P " and the initial of their parish . However , this practice soon fell into disuse . 
 The workhouse movement began at the end of the 17th century with the establishment of the Bristol Corporation of the Poor , founded by Act of Parliament in 1696 . The corporation established a workhouse which combined housing and care of the poor with a house of correction for petty offenders . Following the example of Bristol , some twelve further towns and cities established similar corporations in the next two decades . As these corporations required a private Act , they were not suitable for smaller towns and individual parishes . 
 Starting with the parish of Olney , Buckinghamshire in 1714 several dozen small towns and individual parishes established their own institutions without any specific legal authorization . These were concentrated in the South Midlands and in the county of Essex . From the late 1710s the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge began to promote the idea of parochial workhouses . The Society published several pamphlets on the subject , and supported Sir Edward Knatchbull in his successful efforts to steer the Workhouse Test Act through parliament in 1723 . The act gave legislative authority for the establishment of parochial workhouses , by both single parishes and as joint ventures between two or more parishes . More importantly , the Act helped to publicise the idea of establishing workhouses to a national audience . By 1776 some 1 @,@ 912 parish and corporation workhouses had been established in England and Wales , housing almost 100 @,@ 000 paupers . Perhaps one million people were receiving some kind of parish poor relief by the end of the century . Although many parishes and pamphlet writers expected to earn money from the labour of the poor in workhouses , the vast majority of people obliged to take up residence in workhouses were ill , elderly , or children whose labour proved largely unprofitable . The demands , needs and expectations of the poor also ensured that workhouses came to take on the character of general social policy institutions , combining the functions of creche , and night shelter , geriatric ward and orphanage . In 1782 , Thomas Gilbert finally succeeded in passing an Act that established poor houses solely for the aged and infirm and introduced a system of outdoor relief for the able @-@ bodied . This was the basis for the development of the Speenhamland system , which made financial provision for low @-@ paid workers . Settlement Laws were altered by the Removal Act 1795 which prevented non @-@ settled persons from being moved on unless they had applied for relief . 
 During Napoleonic Wars it became impossible to import cheap grain into Britain which resulted in the price of bread increasing . As wages did not similarly increase many agricultural labourers were plunged into poverty and following peace in 1814 , the Tory government of Lord Liverpool passed the Corn Laws to keep the price of grain artificially high . 1815 saw great social unrest as the end of the French Wars saw industrial and agricultural depression and high unemployment . Social attitudes to poverty began to change after 1815 and overhauls of the system were considered . The Poor Law system was criticized as distorting the free market and in 1816 a Parliamentary Select Committee looked into altering the system which resulted in the Sturges @-@ Bourne Acts being passed . 1817 also saw the passing of the Poor Employment Act , " to authorise the issue of Exchequer Bills and the Advance of Money out of the Consolidated Fund , to a limited Amount , for the carrying on of Public Works and Fisheries in the United Kingdom and Employment of the Poor in Great Britain " . By 1820 , before the passing of the Poor Law Amendment Act workhouses were already being built to reduce the spiraling cost of poor relief . Boyer suggests several possible reasons for the gradual increase in relief given to able @-@ bodied males , including the enclosure movement and a decline in industries such as wool spinning and lace making . Boyer also contends that farmers were able to take advantage of the poor law system to shift some of their labour costs onto the tax payer . 
 = = = The Royal Commission on the Poor Law = = = 
 The 1832 Royal Commission into the Operation of the Poor Laws was set up following the widespread destruction and machine breaking of the Swing Riots . The report was prepared by a commission of nine , including Nassau William Senior , and served by Edwin Chadwick as Secretary . The Royal Commission 's primary concerns were with illegitimacy ( or " <unk> " ) , reflecting the influence of <unk> , and the fear that the practices of the Old Poor Law were undermining the position of the independent labourer . Two practices were of particular concern : the " <unk> " system , where overseers hired out paupers as cheap labour , and the Speenhamland system , which subsidised low wages without relief . The report concluded that the existing Poor Laws undermined the prosperity of the country by interfering with the natural laws of supply and demand , that the existing means of poor relief allowed employers to force down wages , and , that poverty itself was inevitable . 
 The Commission proposed the New Law be governed by two overarching principles : 
 " less eligibility " : that the pauper should have to enter a workhouse with conditions worse than that of the poorest free labourer outside of the workhouse . 
 the " workhouse test " , that relief should only be available in the workhouse . The reformed workhouses were to be uninviting , so that anyone capable of coping outside them would choose not to be in one . 
 When the Act was introduced however it had been partly watered down . The workhouse test and the idea of " less eligibility " were never mentioned themselves and the recommendation of the Royal Commission that outdoor relief ( relief given outside of a workhouse ) should be abolished – was never implemented . The report recommended separate workhouses for the aged , infirm , children , able @-@ bodied females and able @-@ bodied males . The report also stated that parishes should be grouped into unions in order to spread the cost of workhouses and a central authority should be established in order to enforce these measures . The Poor Law Commission set up by Earl Grey took a year to write its report , the recommendations passed easily through Parliament support by both main parties the Whigs and the Tories . The bill gained Royal Assent in 1834 . The few who opposed the Bill were more concerned about the centralisation which it would bring rather than the underpinning philosophy of utilitarianism . 
 = = = New Poor Law = = = 
 The Poor Law Amendment Act was passed in 1834 by the government of Lord Melbourne and largely implemented the findings of the Royal Commission which had presented its findings two years earlier . The New Poor Law is considered to be one of the most " far @-@ reaching pieces of legislation of the entire Nineteenth Century " and " classic example of the fundamental Whig @-@ <unk> reforming legislation of the period " . The Act aimed to reduce the burden on rate payers and can be seen as an attempt by the Whig government to win the votes of the classes enfranchised by the Great Reform Act . Despite being labelled an " amendment act " it completely overhauled the existing system and established a Poor Law Commission to oversee the national operation of the system . This included the forming together of small parishes into Poor Law Unions and the building of workhouses in each union for the giving of poor relief . Although the aim of the legislation was to reduce costs to rate payers , one area not reformed was the method of financing of the Poor Law system which continued to be paid for by levying a " poor rate " on the property owning middle classes . 
 Although the Poor Law Amendment Act did not ban all forms of outdoor relief , it stated that no able @-@ bodied person was to receive money or other help from the Poor Law authorities except in a workhouse . Conditions in workhouses were to be made harsh to discourage people from claiming . Workhouses were to be built in every parish and , if parishes were too small , parishes could group together to form Workhouse Unions . The Poor Law Commissioners were to be responsible for overseeing the implementation of the Act . 
 For various reasons it was impossible to apply some of the terms of the Act . Less eligibility was in some cases impossible without starving paupers and the high cost of building workhouses incurred by rate payers meant that outdoor relief continued to be a popular alternative . Despite efforts to ban outdoor relief , parishes continued to offer it as a more cost @-@ effective method of dealing with pauperism . The Outdoor Labour Test Order and Outdoor Relief Prohibitory Order were both issued to try to prevent people receiving relief outside of the workhouse . 
 When the new Amendment was applied to the industrial North of England ( an area the law had never considered during reviews ) , the system failed catastrophically as many found themselves temporarily unemployed , due to recessions or a fall in stock demands , so called ' cyclical unemployment ' and were reluctant to enter a Workhouse , despite its being the only method of gaining aid . Nottingham also was allowed an exemption from the law and continued to provide outdoor relief 
 The abuses and shortcomings of the system are documented in the novels of Charles Dickens and Frances Trollope and later in People of the Abyss [ 1 ] by Jack London . Despite the aspirations of the reformers , the New Poor Law was unable to make the Workhouse as bad as life outside . The primary problem was that in order to make the diet of the Workhouse inmates " less eligible " than what they could expect outside , it would be necessary to starve the inmates beyond an acceptable level . It was for this reason that other ways were found to deter entrance to the Workhouses . These measures ranged from the introduction of prison style uniforms to the segregation of ' inmates ' into yards – there were normally male , female , boys ' and girls ' yards . 
 In 1846 , the Andover workhouse scandal , where conditions in the Andover Union Workhouse were found to be inhumane and dangerous , prompted a government review and the abolition of the Poor Law Commission which was replaced with a Poor Law Board which meant that a Committee of Parliament was to administer the Poor Law , with a cabinet minister as head . Despite this another scandal occurred over inhumane treatment of paupers in the Huddersfield workhouse . 
 = = = After the New Poor Law = = = 
 After 1847 the Poor Law Commission was replaced with a Poor Law Board . This was because of the Andover workhouse scandal and the criticism of Henry Parker who was responsible for the Andover union as well as the tensions in Somerset House caused by Chadwick 's failure to become a Poor Law Commissioner . The Poor Law had been altered in 1834 because of increasing costs . The Workhouse Visiting Society which formed in 1858 highlighted conditions in workhouses and led to workhouses being inspected more often . The Union <unk> Act was passed in 1865 in order to make the financial burden of pauperism be placed upon the whole unions rather than individual parishes . Most Boards of Guardians were middle class and committed to keeping Poor Rates as low as possible . After the Reform Act 1867 there was increasing welfare legislation . As this legislation required local authorities ' support the Poor Law Board was replaced with a Local Government Board in 1871 . The Local Government Board led a crusade against outdoor relief supported by the Charity Organisation Society , an organization which viewed outdoor relief as destroying the self @-@ reliance of the poor . The effect of this renewed effort to deter outdoor relief was to reduce claimants by a third and to increase numbers in the work house by 12 – 15 % . County Councils were formed in 1888 , District Councils in 1894 . This meant that public housing , unlike health and income maintenance , developed outside the scope of the Poor Law . Poor Law policy after the New Poor Law concerning the elderly , the sick and mentally ill and children became more humane . This was in part due to the expense of providing " mixed workhouses " as well as changing attitudes regarding the causes and nature of poverty . 
 = = = Decline and abolition = = = 
 The Poor Law system began to decline with the availability of other forms of assistance . The growth of friendly societies provided help for its members without recourse to the Poor Law system . Some trade unions also provided help for their members . The Medical Relief Disqualification Removal Act 1885 meant that people who had accessed medical care funded by the poor rate were no longer disqualified from voting in elections . In 1886 the Chamberlain Circular encouraged the Local Government Board to set up work projects when unemployment rates were high rather than use workhouses . In 1905 the Conservatives passed the Unemployed Workman Act which provided for temporary employment for workers in times of unemployment . 
 In 1905 a Royal Commission was set up to investigate what changes could be made to the Poor Law . The Commission produced two conflicting reports but both investigations were largely ignored by the Liberal government when implementing their own scheme of welfare legislation . The welfare reforms of the Liberal Government made several provisions to provide social services without the stigma of the Poor Law , including Old age pensions and National Insurance , and from that period fewer people were covered by the system . From 1911 , the term " Workhouse " was replaced by " Poor Law Institution " . Means tests were developed during the inter @-@ war period , not as part of the Poor Law , but as part of the attempt to offer relief that was not affected by the stigma of pauperism . According to Lees by slowly dismantling the system the Poor Law was " to die by attrition and surgical removals of essential organs " . 
 During the First World War there is evidence that some workhouses were used as makeshift hospitals for wounded servicemen . Numbers using the Poor Law system increased during the interwar years and between 1921 and 1938 despite the extension of unemployment insurance to virtually all workers except the self @-@ employed . Many of these workers were provided with outdoor relief . One aspect of the Poor Law that continued to cause resentment was that the burden of poor relief was not shared equally by rich and poor areas but , rather , fell most heavily on those areas in which poverty was at its worst . This was a central issue in the Poplar Rates Rebellion led by George Lansbury and others in 1921 . Lansbury had in 1911 written a provocative attack on the workhouse system in a pamphlet entitled " Smash Up the Workhouse ! " . 
 Poverty in the interwar years ( 1918 – 1939 ) was responsible for several measures which largely killed off the Poor Law system . The Board of Guardians ( Default ) Act 1926 was passed in response to some Boards of Guardians supporting the Miners during the General Strike . Workhouses were officially abolished by the Local Government Act 1929 , and between 1929 and 1930 Poor Law Guardians , the " workhouse test " and the term " pauper " disappeared . The Unemployment Assistance Board was set up in 1934 to deal with those not covered by the earlier 1911 National Insurance Act passed by the Liberals , and by 1937 the able @-@ bodied poor had been absorbed into this scheme . By 1936 only 13 % of people were still receiving poor relief in some form of institution . In 1948 the Poor Law system was finally abolished with the introduction of the modern welfare state and the passing of the National Assistance Act . The National Health Service Act 1946 came into force in 1948 and created the modern day National Health Service . 
 = = Opposition = = 
 Opposition to the Poor Law grew at the beginning of the 19th century . The 1601 system was felt to be too costly and was considered in academic circles as encouraging the underlying problems . Jeremy Bentham argued for a disciplinary , punitive approach to social problems , whilst the writings of Thomas Malthus focused attention on overpopulation , and the growth of illegitimacy . David Ricardo argued that there was an " iron law of wages " . The effect of poor relief , in the view of the reformers , was to undermine the position of the " independent labourer " . 
 In the period following the Napoleonic Wars , several reformers altered the function of the " poorhouse " into the model for a deterrent workhouse . The first of the deterrent workhouses in this period was at Bingham , Nottinghamshire . The second was Becher 's workhouse in Southwell , now maintained by the National Trust . George Nicholls , the overseer at Southwell , was to become a Poor Law Commissioner in the reformed system . The 1817 Report of the Select Committee on the Poor Laws condemned the Poor Law as causing poverty itself . 
 The introduction of the New Poor Law also resulted in opposition . Some who gave evidence to the Royal Commission into the Operation of the Poor Laws suggested that the existing system had proved adequate and was more adaptable to local needs . This argument was strongest in the industrial North of England and in the textile industries where outdoor relief was a more effective method of dealing with cyclical unemployment as well as being a more cost @-@ effective method . Poor Law commissioners faced greatest opposition in Lancashire and the West Riding of Yorkshire where in 1837 there was high unemployment during an economic depression . The New Poor Law was seen as interference from Londoners with little understanding of local affairs . Opposition was unusually strong because committees had already been formed in opposition to the Ten Hours Movement , leaders of the Ten Hours campaign such as Richard Oastler , Joseph Rayner Stephens and John Fielden became the leaders of the Anti @-@ Poor Law campaign . The Book of Murder was published and was aimed at creating opposition to the workhouse <unk> and pamphlets were published spreading rumour and propaganda about Poor Law Commissioners and alleged infanticide inside of workhouses . Opposition to the Poor Law yielded some successes in delaying the development of workhouses , and one workhouse in Stockport was attacked by a crowd of rioters . As many Boards of Guardians were determined to continue under the old system , the Poor Law Commission granted some boards the right to continue providing relief under the Old Poor Law . However , the movement against the New Poor Law was short @-@ lived , leading many to instead turn towards Chartism . 
 = = Scotland and Ireland = = 
 The Poor Law systems of Scotland and Ireland were distinct from the English Poor Law system covering England and Wales although Irish legislation was heavily influenced by the English Poor Law Amendment Act . In Scotland the Poor Law system was reformed by the 1845 Scottish Poor Law Act . In Ireland the Irish Poor Law Act of 1838 was the first attempt to put control of the destitute and responsibility for their welfare on a statutory basis . Due to exceptional overcrowding , workhouses in Ireland stopped admissions during the Irish Potato famine and increasingly resorted to outdoor relief . Emigration was sometimes used by landlords as a method of keeping the cost of poor relief down and removing surplus labour . Reforms after the Irish War of Independence resulted in the abolition of Boards of Guardians in the jurisdiction of the Irish Free State and their replacement by County Boards of Health . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 The historiography of the Poor Laws has passed through several distinct phases . The " traditionalist " or " orthodox " account of the Poor Laws focuses upon the deficiencies of the Old Poor Law . This early historiography was influential in successfully overhauling the system . Blaug presents the first revisionist analysis of the Poor Law in “ The Myth of the Old Poor Law and the making of the New ” , arguing that the Old Poor Law did not reduce the efficiency of agricultural workers , lower wages , depress rents or compound the burden on rate payers . Instead Blaug argues that Old Poor Law was a device " for dealing with the problems of structural unemployment and substandard wages in the lagging rural sector of a rapidly growing but still underdeveloped economy " . Other areas of Poor Law which have concerned historians include the extent to which the Second Great Reform Act contributed to the Poor Law Amendment Act and the extent to which outdoor relief was abolished following the New Poor Law . 
 = Broken Sword = 
 Broken Sword is a franchise centered on a series of adventure games . The first game in the series , Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars , was released in 1996 by English video game company Revolution Software . The first sequel , Broken Sword II : The Smoking Mirror , was released a year later , and was followed by three more sequels : Broken Sword : The Sleeping Dragon in 2003 , Broken Sword : The Angel of Death in 2006 , and Broken Sword 5 : The Serpent 's Curse in 2013 . A remake of the first game in the series , known as Broken Sword : Shadow of the Templars – The Director 's Cut , was released in 2009 , and a remake of the second game in the series , Broken Sword : The Smoking Mirror – Remastered , in 2010 ( for iOS devices ; other platforms followed in 2011 ) . 
 The main protagonists of the series are George Stobbart , an American patent lawyer , and Nicole " Nico " Collard , a French freelance journalist , although Nico does not appear as a playable character in the original game The Shadow of the Templars . 
 The Broken Sword series was originally conceived in 1994 by Charles Cecil , Noirin Carmody and Sean Brennan , while talking about the mythology of the Knights Templar . The first three games in the series were all developed by Revolution Software , while the fourth game was co @-@ developed by Revolution and Sumo Digital . The Shadow of the Templars and The Smoking Mirror were critical and commercial successes , selling millions . However , The Sleeping Dragon and The Angel of Death received mixed reviews and were not as popular as the first two games . This was mainly due to the switch to 3D graphics and that the third game left the " point and click " interface to a more action oriented gameplay . The series appeared on several top adventure game lists . A comic book was produced for each remake of the first two Broken Sword games . 
 In 2007 , it was revealed that a Broken Sword film was in the works and would be produced by <unk> studios , although there has been no sign of development for many years , which may indicate that the project has been abandoned . However , in 2015 , Matt Smalley of Cheltenham , UK , started fund raising on a new planned Broken Sword film . According to Matt Smalley " Fund Raising is going well , I send out at least 50 emails and Facebook posts a week and hope to reach my target amount shortly . But not before sending out some more emails and recurring Facebook posts . " 
 = = Games = = 
 = = Story overview = = 
 In The Shadow of the Templars , American George Stobbart , who is touring Europe , is a witness and victim of a bomb attack on a Parisian café " La Chandelle Verte " , caused by a clown , later revealed to be a serial killer named Khan , who steals an old man 's briefcase and then sets off a bomb inside the café . Shortly after , he meets a French photo @-@ journalist , Nicole " Nico " Collard , a resident of Rue Jarry in Paris , with whom he tries to discover who is responsible for the murder of the old man , Plantard , and while doing so , end up unraveling a conspiracy relating to the Knights Templar . The third and fourth game , The Sleeping Dragon and The Angel of Death , also follow the Templar @-@ related story line : The Sleeping Dragon continuing the story from The Shadow of the Templars with a number of returning characters , while in The Angel of Death , George and Nico , with a newly introduced character Anna @-@ Maria , unravel a mystery related to the Catholic Church . Unlike the other installments , in The Smoking Mirror , George and Nico unravel a Mayan mystery , involving the Mayan god Tezcatlipoca . The Serpent 's Curse will follow a storyline related to the Gnostic Gospels . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = The Shadow of the Templars and The Smoking Mirror = = = 
 Video game designer , writer and director Charles Cecil began working on the scenario for Broken Sword , Revolution Software 's third game following Lure of the Temptress ( 1992 ) and Beneath a Steel Sky ( 1994 ) , in 1992 , which would be set in Paris with a Knights Templar storyline . After visiting Paris and reading The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail , Cecil was certain the Templars would be a good subject for a game . Cecil , Dave Cummins and Jonathan L. Howard began work on the story and design . Cecil and Cummins attended a film @-@ writing course and their script was read by senior BBC scriptwriter and dramatist Alan Drury . Steve Ince , who created initial location sketches for the game before working on Beneath a Steel Sky , was promoted to producer halfway through the project . In 1994 Cecil and Noirin Carmody met with Sean Brennan , then @-@ head of publishing at Virgin Interactive , and Virgin agreed to publish the game 's PC version , but were not interested in publishing the game on the PlayStation , feeling that only 3D games would sell for the console . As a result , Cecil contacted Sony Computer Entertainment , who agreed to publish the game for the console . Tony Warriner and David Sykes were the game 's designer @-@ programmer Carmody the executive producer . The game uses the Virtual Theatre engine , as do Revolution 's previous two games . 
 One of Cecil 's goals was to depart from the humour @-@ based adventure games more popular at the time by creating a game with good pacing and a complex storyline , a reason he thought the Knights Templar would be an ideal subject . Broken Sword offered a unique " conversation icon " system which would not reveal to the player what the protagonist was about to say ; Cecil 's intention was to make the game more cinematic . Although aiming at designing a game with a cinematic feel , Cecil felt the game should not resemble interactive movies of that time , which he felt were " mimicking movies " . He wanted to create two protagonists who would exchange ideas , helping drive the game along . He made George American and Nico French to appeal to US and European markets . Revolution believed they needed to utilise the best of other creative industries . Hand drawn artwork was animated by artists including Don Bluth Studios ' Eoghan Cahill and Neil Breen and Red Rover Studio 's Mike Burgess , resulting in graphics animated in a style resembling classic animated films . The game 's final cost was one million pounds . 
 Broken Sword II : The Smoking Mirror was conceived in 1997 , by Cecil and Revolution 's crew . The artwork for Broken Sword 2 was developed through a number of stages . Initially pencil drawings were made of characters which were then digitally coloured in , before being cleaned up . The background layouts were produced in a similar way , also starting out as pencil designs . They were all drawn by Eoghan Cahill and Neil Breen , who both previously worked on the original Broken Sword game , while they were now working together with Amy <unk> and Lee Taylor . The music in the game was again composed by Barrington Pheloung , with Bob Sekar adding the closing score . While Rolf Saxon returns to voice actor of George , Jennifer Caron Hall a bilingual actress and daughter of French actress Leslie Caron , was cast as Nico . Theatre director Edward Hall ( director ) rehearsed the assembled actors and took no more than a week to record the entire game , according to an interview given by Rolf Saxon in 2011 Alternative Magazine The game was first released for Windows on October 31 , 1997 . 
 = = = The Sleeping Dragon and The Angel of Death = = = 
 Revolution first discussed the idea of a third Broken Sword in 2000 . At first , The Sleeping Dragon was planned to have similar cartoon @-@ quality visuals to the first two Broken Sword games ; however , Revolution decided not to use the " flat " look , claiming it lacked visual depth . The team wanted the game to look believable , but not necessarily realistic , similar to Japanese animated films . Textures were hand drawn to achieve the " cartoon " look , while the light @-@ map employed radiosity to create realistic lighting . Advances in hardware plus the changes in methodology allowed the game to move to 24 @-@ bit color . To make the game feel like a film , Revolution brought in a cinematic consultant , Bob Keen , who made sure the game conveyed emotions and atmospheres appropriate for each scene . The music in the game was composed by Ben McCullough . The voice recording was scheduled to take five days ; however , the entire process took four days . The voices were recorded with the voice actors together , enabling better getting into their parts . The full script is 6 @,@ 000 lines in total , similar to Broken Sword II . While Rolf Saxon returns to voice George , Nico was this time played by Sarah Crook . The game 's final cost was two million pounds . 
 Revolution Software and THQ announced Broken Sword : The Angel of Death on August 17 , 2005 . <unk> to Charles Cecil , the Broken Sword was originally planned to be a trilogy , but that after the release of Broken Sword : The Sleeping Dragon , the demand from fans for a sequel was overwhelming . Though The Sleeping Dragon benefited commercially from being released on console as well as PC , this approach required certain development compromises as the PC version was held back by the constraints of the console versions . As a result , The Angel of Death was written for PC only " so as to really push the boundaries in terms of the technology and graphics . " As a series ' first , Revolution was not the only developer , but was co @-@ developed by Revolution and Sumo Digital . Cecil believed that because of the requirement for ever larger team sizes , it was no longer possible to maintain a large development team to write single original titles , resulting in Revolution closed the production side in order to concentrate on design , and Sumo to concentrate on production . It is the first game to be amBX enabled . Broken Sword : The Sleeping Dragon was criticised for featuring a high number of action elements . Cecil stated that he aimed to put the player under pressure . While he still stood behind this principle , he thought the action elements were not the right approach . The Sleeping Dragon was also criticised for using a high number of crate puzzles , resulting in Cecil reducing the number of them . The music in the game was composed by Ben McCullough and features tracks by <unk> . While Rolf Saxon returns to voice George Stobbart , Nicole " Nico " Collard was this time played by Katherine <unk> . 
 = = = The Shadow of the Templars – Director 's Cut and The Smoking Mirror – Remastered = = = 
 On March 21 , 2009 , Ubisoft released a special edition of The Shadow of the Templars for the Wii and Nintendo DS . According to Cecil , the Director 's Cut came about thanks to a group of Broken Sword fans , who started an online petition begging him to bring the series to the Wii and DS . The game starts a day before the Parisian cafe explosion in the original game , filling in some of Nicole Collard 's back @-@ story . Dave Gibbons , with whom Revolution worked previously on their 1994 cult classic adventure Beneath a Steel Sky , worked on visual references for the game ; He also produced a comic book to accompany the game 's DS release . In the Director 's Cut , Hazel Ellerby returns to voice Nicole Collard in the new sections , playing Nico again for the first time since the original game 's release . Rolf Saxon , as in every sequel , also returns to voice George Stobbart . Unlike in the original game , players control Nicole Collard for selected game sections . Besides the new character artwork by Gibbons during conversations , the Director 's Cut also features a new first person view for certain puzzles . In the DS version , there is no spoken dialogue , only subtitles . A version of the Director 's Cut for iPhone and iPod Touch was released on January 20 , 2010 . In May 2010 , a version with higher resolution and a digital comic was released on the iPad . A PC version was released on August 27 , 2010 on various digital distribution services . 
 When considering the project , Cecil played the game again and noticed many issues , including that backgrounds were pixilated , the movies and audio were of poor quality , and he also felt some dialogue was out of place . He thought all these elements could be addressed and improved in a remastered edition , in which they could add a diary , hint system , and new artwork from Dave Gibbons , which they could offer as an interactive digital comic . On December 9 , 2010 , Revolution Software announced the release of Broken Sword : The Smoking Mirror – Remastered on Apple iOS devices , and was finally released on December 16 , 2010 . The new features include an exclusive interactive digital comic from Dave Gibbons , fully animated facial expressions , enhanced graphics , high quality music , a context @-@ sensitive hint system , diary , and a Dropbox integration which facilitates a unique cross @-@ platform save @-@ game feature , enabling players to enjoy the same adventure simultaneously on multiple devices . It also featured full Game Center integration – including in @-@ game achievements . The Mac and PC versions followed in early 2011 . 
 = = = The Serpent 's Curse = = = 
 On August 23 , 2012 , Revolution announced a fifth title in the series , Broken Sword 5 : The Serpent 's Curse , has been in development for six months and is to return to the series ' 2D graphical style with an early 2013 release targeted . Cecil also announced that , despite interest from the " industry 's biggest third party publisher , " funding for the game 's remaining development is to be sought via Kickstarter with a target of $ 400 @,@ 000 . It received its funding of $ 771 @,@ 561 on September 22 , 2012 . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 = = = Sales and critical reception = = = 
 The Broken Sword franchise is Europe 's most successful adventure series , selling six million units ; The Shadow of the Templars and The Smoking Mirror are Revolution 's best @-@ selling titles , each selling a million copies . With the decline of the adventure genre at the beginning of the 2000s , sales of the Broken Sword series decreased as well , with The Sleeping Dragon and The Angel of Death selling a few hundred thousand copies . During the so @-@ called " adventure renaissance " , the two Broken Sword remakes were met with success ; in 2011 , the Director 's Cut and The Smoking Mirror : Remastered sold 500 @,@ 000 copies on the iOS alone . 
 The series ' installments have received positive reviews , with The Shadow of the Templars often being cited as a classic in the adventure genre , ranking high on various " top " lists . The remakes were met with acclaim , most notably the iOS versions , often called one of the best games on the platform . 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 On May 21 , 2007 , it was announced that Charles Cecil had begun the work of taking the game franchise to the silver screen . 
 Dave Gibbons produced comics for each remake of the first two Broken Sword games ; Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars – Director 's Cut , and Broken Sword : The Smoking Mirror – Remastered . 
 On September 28 , 2008 , <unk> released a fan @-@ made freeware Broken Sword game , called Broken Sword 2 @.@ 5 : The Return of the Templars . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 = = = Game listings = = = 
 Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars 
 Adventure Gamers : Top 20 Adventure Games of All @-@ Time ( 2004 ) — 4th 
 Adventure Classic Gaming : Top 10 retro graphic adventure games of all time from PC to consoles ( 2006 ) — 3rd 
 Bright Hub : Best Windows Mobile Games Software ( 2008 ) 
 Retro Gamer : Top 20 Adventure Games of All @-@ Time ... not by LucasArts ( 2010 ) — 2nd 
 Universe Publishing : 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die ( 2010 ) 
 NowGamer : Greatest Point @-@ And @-@ Click Games ( Not By LucasArts ) ( 2011 ) 
 Adventure Gamers : Top 100 All @-@ Time Adventures ( 2011 ) — 4th 
 GamesRadar : Best point @-@ and @-@ click adventure games ( 2012 ) — 8th 
 GameSpot : Top Adventure Games — 3rd ( review score : 9 @.@ 2 / 10 ) 
 Adventure Gamers : Top Adventure Games recommendations list 
 Broken Sword II : The Smoking Mirror 
 Kotaku : The Most Beautiful Cartoon @-@ Style Adventure Games ( 2013 ) 
 Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars – Director 's Cut 
 Pocket Gamer : Top 10 DS games of 2009 so far ( 2009 ) 
 PCWorld : 25 Best iPad Games ( 2010 ) 
 Complex : Mobile Check @-@ In : The Hottest New iPhone Games ( 2010 ) 
 Pocket Gamer : Top 10 best @-@ looking up @-@ scaled iPhone games on iPad ( 2010 ) 
 Pocket Gamer : Top 10 @-@ point @-@ and @-@ click adventure games on iPhone and iPad ( 2010 ) 
 Pocket Gamer : The 10 best iPhone games of 2010 ( so far ) ( 2010 ) 
 Pocket Gamer : Top 10 @-@ point @-@ and @-@ click adventures for iPad ( 2011 ) 
 Pocket Gamer : Top 10 iOS games with Game Center ( 2011 ) 
 Metacritic : 25 Best iPhone and iPad Games of 2010 ( 2010 ) 
 Trusted Reviews : Top 100 Best iPhone Video Games Ever ( 2011 ) 
 Pocket Gamer : Top 10 best Android games to show off your new LG Nexus 4 ( 2013 ) 
 The Sunday Telegraph : 500 Must @-@ Have Apps ( 2013 ) 
 VideoGamer.com : Top Wii Adventure Games of All Time — 5th ( review score : 8 / 10 ) 
 VideoGamer.com : Top DS Adventure Games of All Time — 1st ( review score : 9 / 10 ) 
 Adventure Gamers : PC Classic Releases recommendations list 
 Broken Sword : The Smoking Mirror – Remastered 
 Pocket Gamer : Top 10 @-@ point @-@ and @-@ click adventures for iPad ( 2011 ) 
 The Guardian : 30 Best Android apps this week ( 2012 ) 
 Stuff : Best Android apps this week ( 2012 ) 
 Broken Sword 5 : The Serpent 's Curse 
 <unk> : Top 100 Most Anticipated Games of 2013 ( 2012 ) — 65th 
 Micro Mart : The best PC games of 2013 ( 2013 ) — 15th 
 Adventure Gamers : Hype @-@ o @-@ Meter — 2nd ( Aug. – Oct. 2012 ) , 3rd ( November 2012 – April 2013 ) 
 = = = Game element listings = = = 
 The Goat Puzzle 
 Computer and Video Games : Gaming 's hardest puzzles ( 2011 ) 
 GameFront : 5 Crazy Difficult and Intricate Video Game Puzzles ( 2012 ) 
 Barrington Pheloung 's " Intro " opening theme 
 Computer and Video Games : Video game soundtracks : The 100 best themes of all time ( 2012 ) — 21st 
 Nicole Collard 
 Pocket Gamer : Our top 10 favourite women in mobile and handheld games ( 2013 ) 
 Khan 
 The Telegraph : The 10 best video game assassins ( 2011 ) 
 Kotaku : The Scariest Clowns And Jesters in Video Games ( 2013 ) 
