 = Little Busters ! = 
 Little Busters ! ( リトルバスターズ ! , Ritoru Basutāzu ! ) is a Japanese visual novel developed by Key . It was released on July 27 , 2007 for Windows PCs and is rated for all ages . Little Busters ! is Key 's sixth game , along with other titles such as Kanon , Air , and Clannad . An adult version of the game titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy was released on July 25 , 2008 for Windows , unlike Kanon and Air , which were first released with adult content and then had later versions with such content removed . Ecstasy was later ported to the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation Portable , PlayStation Vita , and PlayStation 3 . The story follows the life of Riki Naoe , a high school student who has been a member of a group of friends named the Little Busters since childhood . Riki brings multiple girls at his school into the Little Busters to have enough people to play a baseball game . 
 The gameplay in Little Busters ! follows a branching plot line which offers pre @-@ determined scenarios with courses of interaction , and focuses on the appeal of the six female main characters by the player character , which increases to nine in Ecstasy . There are additional minigames added into the gameplay , such as battle sequences that resemble fighting games or baseball batting practice , which serve to give the characters experience , obtain accessories to use during battle , and improve their statistics . Both Little Busters ! and Ecstasy ranked as the best @-@ selling PC game sold in Japan for the time of their release , and Ecstasy would go on to sell over 100 @,@ 000 units . Key went on to produce an adult spin @-@ off called Kud Wafter in June 2010 , which expanded on the scenario of Kudryavka Noumi , one of the heroines from Little Busters ! and Ecstasy . 
 There have been 13 manga adaptations based on Little Busters ! and Ecstasy published by ASCII Media Works , Kadokawa Shoten and Ichijinsha . Comic anthologies , light novels and art books were also published , as were several music albums . There have been two Internet radio shows hosted by the voice actors of Rin and Kyousuke Natsume and Kudryavka Noumi . A 26 @-@ episode anime television series adaptation , produced by J.C.Staff and directed by Yoshiki Yamakawa , aired between October 2012 and April 2013 , and an additional original video animation ( OVA ) episode was released in August 2013 . A 13 @-@ episode second season produced by the same staff titled Little Busters ! Refrain aired between October and December 2013 . An eight @-@ episode OVA series titled Little Busters ! EX was released between January and July 2014 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Little Busters ! is a romance visual novel in which the player assumes the role of Riki Naoe . Much of its gameplay is spent on reading the story 's narrative and dialogue . The text in the game is accompanied by character sprites , which represent who Riki is talking to , over background art . Throughout the game , the player encounters CG artwork at certain points in the story , which take the place of the background art and character sprites . When the game is completed at least once , a gallery of the viewed CGs and played background music becomes available on the game 's title screen . Little Busters ! follows a branching plot line with multiple endings , and depending on the decisions that the player makes during the game , the plot will progress in a specific direction . 
 There are seven main plot lines that the player will have the chance to experience . Throughout gameplay , the player is given multiple options to choose from , and text progression pauses at these points until a choice is made . To view all plot lines in their entirety , the player will have to replay the game multiple times and choose different choices to further the plot to an alternate direction . When first playing the game , the scenarios for all six heroines are available . Once a scenario for any one heroine is completed , that scenario will be unavailable in the next play through because the last choice that will ultimately lead to that heroine 's scenario becomes unavailable for players to choose . After the completion of these six routes , the final scenario called Refrain is made available , which serves to bring everything to a definite conclusion and answers questions brought up throughout the normal gameplay . Completing Refrain makes available all the heroine 's scenarios that were previously made inaccessible during gameplay so that the player can revisit the scenarios again , along with some extra decision points that were previously unavailable . 
 Throughout gameplay , the player encounters various minigames , which range from simple to more complex . The first type of minigame encountered is a battle sequence that resembles a fighting game , but no interaction from the player is required to fight . These recurring battle sequences represent when the members of the Little Busters get into physical fights with either each other or with others . Each member of the fight has a set of statistics attributed to them ( which includes strength , stamina , agility , reflex , concentration , judgment , and luck ) along with a life bar to keep track of how many hit points a fighter has left . The maximum number of hit points is determined by the given fighter 's stamina rating . Weapons may be used along with any accessories the fighter has in their possession , and these items may be exchanged with other characters . Another recurring minigame involves the player being able to play baseball batting practice with members of the Little Busters . The player , as Riki , controls his position and when to swing the bat . 
 The Little Busters will also participate in missions to accomplish some goal , and a mission will either be completed or failed depending on the choices of the player . These missions are connected with the battle sequences and batting practice in that they serve to give the characters experience , obtain accessories to use during fights , and improve their statistics . However , these missions do not affect the main plot in any way — the player even has the choice to turn off most of the minigames so that the player may focus on the main plot , including the battle sequences and batting practice . The first time that the game is played , Rin 's statistics are weak compared to other characters . However , when the player completes several heroine 's routes , Rin 's and Riki 's statistics will start out higher than before when the player starts a new game , allowing Rin and Riki to stand a better chance against opponents with higher statistics . The statistics of the Little Busters members are shown in a ranking system from highest to lowest in overall statistics . 
 Despite Little Busters ! having a rating for all ages , there is an ample amount of CG artwork featuring the female characters in risqué situations , though never to the point to be considered sexual in nature . This is in stark contrast to Key 's previous titles Clannad and Planetarian : The Reverie of a Little Planet that also have ratings for all ages , but those titles contain no such risqué situations or even any fan service . 
 In Little Busters ! Ecstasy , adult elements were added to the gameplay in the form of sexual CGs depicting Riki and a given heroine having sex . Ecstasy extends the story for the scenarios of the heroines in Little Busters ! , as well as increasing the number of heroine routes from six to nine . These three heroine routes include scenarios for Kanata Futaki and Sasami Sasasegawa — two supporting characters from Little Busters ! — and a new heroine named Saya Tokido who is only featured in Ecstasy . The first time the game is played , these three heroine routes are unavailable to the player until after the Refrain scenario is completed , though the player is given the option make them immediately available . Ecstasy has several minor additions and changes to the minigames as well , including the addition of weapons available for use in the battle sequences . Also , Ecstasy features the addition of two recurring minigames related to Saya : a shooting game with pistols and navigating a labyrinth . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and themes = = = 
 The main part of the story takes place at a high school in Japan . There is a " secret of this world " that Kyousuke speaks of ; Kengo and Masato are also aware of this . The characters live in either the male or female dormitories on the school grounds which are across from each other . Beside the dorms is the main school building where classes take place , which also houses the cafeteria on the ground floor . The school is four stories and the roof is normally restricted from access . Beyond the main school building is the large schoolyard , with the pool area adjacent to the yard . On the other side of the field is the baseball field , with the gymnasium and tennis court beyond it , which are closer to the main school building . 
 Childhood and adolescence are two important themes in Little Busters ! . The opening video of the visual novel starts with two lines written in English : " What ' Adolescence ' do you have ? " and " Do you remember ' Childhood ' ? " . Riki Naoe , the male protagonist , has four childhood friends whom he grew up together with through adolescence and still hangs out with when the story begins . Thus , friendship is another theme presented in the form of Riki 's relationships with his friends in high school , and is thought to be irreplaceable . The opening video of the original visual novel contains a third line written in English , " The irreplaceable one existed there , " though another line was added into the opening video of Little Busters ! Ecstasy : " This will remind you that you have to recollect ' Adolescence ' . " 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 The player assumes the role of Riki Naoe , the protagonist of Little Busters ! . He is seen as weak due to his girlish appearance and physical build but is very straightforward and has more common sense than most of his friends . He is a member of a group of friends called the Little Busters , which originally consisted of four members , but expanded to five with Riki during his childhood . The leader of the Little Busters is Kyousuke Natsume , who is the eldest member . He often comes up with absurd ideas , but almost always follows up with a reasonable explanation along with it . 
 Kyousuke 's younger sister is Rin Natsume , the main heroine of Little Busters ! , and is initially the only female member of the Little Busters . She does not communicate well with others due to her poor social skills and can be seen as inarticulate . Due to this , she is shy , and is usually seen alone . Rin loves cats and at school takes care of several strays . Riki 's roommate and fellow member of the Little Busters is Masato Inohara who loves to work out and improve his muscle mass . He has a particular fondness for Riki , which he is more than willing to express out aloud . Masato 's rival and fellow member of the Little Busters is Kengo Miyazawa who is skilled in the art of kendo and seemingly has a cynical personality , but his passion for the Little Busters is unmatched by any of the other members . 
 In Little Busters ! , Riki meets five other girls attending his high school who later become members of the Little Busters , in addition to three more girls in Ecstasy ; all eight are heroines in the game . The first is Komari <unk> , a childish girl who takes great interest in fairy @-@ tales , picture books , candy , and clothing with many layers of frills . She is very clumsy , though athletic , and will often not think before she acts . Haruka Saigusa is a schoolmate of Riki 's from a different class , but always finds time to hang around in Riki 's classroom . She incites <unk> for her own personal enjoyment , which causes her twin sister , the public morals chairman Kanata Futaki , to chase after her . Kanata generally acts cold towards her sister , though gets annoyed when Riki gets close to Haruka . Kudryavka Noumi , known as " Kud " ( <unk> , Kudo ) for short , is a girl who is one quarter Japanese , and three @-@ quarters Russian . Despite having a poor handle on the English language , she was able to skip a year in school due to credits obtained through studying abroad , making her the youngest member of the Little Busters . Kudryavka appears in Key 's eighth game , Kud Wafter , as the main heroine . 
 Yuiko <unk> is Riki 's classmate who has a self @-@ sufficient personality , and is sometimes seen carrying a replica of a katana called Muramasa . She is seen as an older sister to everyone despite being the same age of almost the entire cast , and is fond of things or people she considers to be cute . Mio Nishizono is a calm girl who is very diligent . Due to having weak health , she is always seen with a parasol when outside . She enjoys reading , especially when the story contains boys love elements , and her room is filled with books . Sasami Sasasegawa is the captain of the girl 's softball team and is Rin 's rival ; while Rin loves cats , Sasami is a devoted dog lover . Saya Tokido , who only appeared in Ecstasy , is a popular girl at Riki 's school , though she is known to be ditzy . At night , she wanders around the school to protect a " treasure " from those she calls the " darkness executives " ( <unk> , <unk> no <unk> ) , and even has to fight them for it . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Little Busters ! ' story revolves around the main protagonist Riki Naoe , a young male high school student . When Riki was a child , his parents died , leaving him hopeless and depressed . He was saved by a group — three boys and a girl , all his age — who referred to themselves as the Little Busters , a group dedicated to fighting evil and preserving justice . The leader of the group was Kyousuke Natsume who had a younger sister named Rin . The other two members were Masato Inohara and Kengo Miyazawa , who were friends despite being rivals . They took Riki out and played together with him during his time of need , making him the fifth Little Busters member . In time , Riki enjoyed playing with them , and his grief over his parents gradually faded away . When the story begins , Riki and his friends are seemingly in their second year of high school , except for Kyousuke who is in his third year . They still hang out together , and enjoy their school life . 
 The story opens on Sunday May 13 , 2007 , and the next day at school , Kyousuke decides that the Little Busters are going to play a baseball game , except they do not have enough members to have a complete team . Kyousuke gives Riki and Rin the task of going around school to find more members to join , preferably girls so as not to leave Rin the lone girl . Riki finds five girls his age willing to help him out : Komari <unk> , Haruka Saigusa , Kudryavka Noumi , Yuiko <unk> , and Mio Nishizono ; three other girls Riki meets are Kanata Futaki , Sasami Sasasegawa , and Saya Tokido . Throughout the game , Riki hangs out with these girls and learns more about them . 
 The story 's main part takes place in what seems to be a normal high school , but in fact all took place in the school term previous to Little Busters ! , and Riki and Rin are reliving it in an artificial world created by the other members of the Little Busters . They , and the other main characters , were involved in a bus accident during a field trip , and only the two of them will survive . Kyousuke and the others created the artificial world to make them strong enough to deal with what will happen when they awaken in the real world . This was caused by a ripple effect based on all of their desires to save Riki and Rin . The world loops , but though they forget what happens , Riki and Rin do grow stronger , and Kyousuke hopes that they will eventually be strong enough to leave the world . They do manage to survive and get away from the crash site before Riki collapses because he has narcolepsy . Riki vows to fight against his narcoleptic condition , which was the reason why he was only able to save Rin and merely get away from the explosion before collapsing . 
 Rejecting this turn of events , Rin travels back into the artificial world again ( this time created by Riki and Rin ) and helps Riki overcome his weakness . Afterwards , the two of them go back to waking up at the crash site . This time , Riki and Rin work together to save everyone at the crash scene . Kyousuke , who sneaked onto the bus ( as a third year he was not allowed to go ) , managed to block the leak hole on the gas tank to delay the explosion , despite his injuries being far greater than anyone else . Everyone in the bus recovers from their injuries , although Kyousuke 's recovery takes longer due to extensive injuries . Finally , after Kyousuke returns , he rents a minibus , and the members of the Little Busters set out for a trip to the ocean . 
 = = Development = = 
 For the first time in Key 's history , two artists were given the position of art director for the visual novel : Itaru Hinoue and Na @-@ Ga . Hinoue has been Key 's signature art director since Key 's first game Kanon , and Na @-@ Ga has been with Key since the production of Air working as one of the computer graphics artists to render background art used in Key 's games . Due to having two art directors , character design was split between the two , though Na @-@ Ga is responsible for the character design of the majority of the cast . Of the six heroines in the story , three were designed by each artist ; Komari , Haruka , and Yuiko were designed by Hinoue while Rin , Kudryavka , and Mio were done by Na @-@ Ga . 
 For work on the scenario , Jun Maeda contributed along with composing some of the game 's music . Further writers include Leo Kashida who had worked on Tomoyo After : It 's a Wonderful Life , and two new scenario writers to Key — Yūto Tonokawa , and Chika Shirokiri . Maeda wrote the scenarios for Rin and the entire male cast ; Kashida wrote the scenario for Mio ; Tonokawa wrote the scenarios for Komari and Yuiko ; finally , Shirokiri wrote the scenarios for Haruka and Kudryavka . In an interview of Maeda and Tonokawa in the August 2007 issue of Push ! ! , it was reported that the story of Little Busters ! is twice as long as Air 's , but only half as long as Clannad 's . However , this does not take into account the minigames in Little Busters ! which serve to lengthen the game . The music in the game , not counting Maeda 's , was composed by Key 's signature composers Shinji Orito and Magome Togoshi , in addition to Manack and members of PMMK . Togoshi left Key in October 2006 before the visual novel went on sale . 
 Three or four months before the release of Little Busters ! , it was decided that an adult version of the game would be developed titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy ( リトルバスターズ ! エクスタシー , Ritoru Basutāzu Ekusutashī ) , or Little Busters @-@ EX for short . Na @-@ Ga designed the heroine Saya Tokido and Maeda wrote her scenario . Tonokawa wrote Sasami Sasasegawa 's scenario , and Shirokiri wrote Kanata Futaki 's story . Lines from the original game were rewritten as well for Ecstasy , and the total number of lines with spoken dialogue comes to 43 @,@ 347 lines . The total word count in Ecstasy exceeds that of Clannad by about 4 @,@ 000 words , making it Key 's longest work , and carries so much data that Ecstasy was released on two DVDs instead of one for the original release . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 An art exhibition of Little Busters ! was held in Osaka , Japan between May 3 and May 4 , 2007 , and in Tokyo , Japan between May 24 and May 25 , 2007 . A large amount of the character and background art featured in the game was showcased , along with original art used to promote the character artwork , and other production sketches drawn when the game was still in development . <unk> outlining the story for the game were on display , along with the flowcharts for Clannad . Also at the exhibition was a life @-@ size mannequin of Rin Natsume with a baseball glove in one hand , though instead of a baseball , a cat was in the glove . This mannequin was later put onto the Japanese Yahoo ! Auction website in late September 2007 and sold for 764 @,@ 000 yen , a far cry from the original wish of selling the figure for 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 yen . 
 Little Busters ! was the first Key title to receive coverage in an entire issue of Dengeki G 's Festival ! , a special edition version of Dengeki G 's Magazine which is published in irregular intervals each year by ASCII Media Works ; the issue in question was the ninth , published on June 30 , 2007 . Along with a full 80 pages of information on Little Busters ! , the magazine came bundled with a double @-@ sided hug pillowcase , a small cell phone cleaner which could also attach to a cell phone , and a B5 size jigsaw puzzle . ASCII Media Works published the third volume of another special edition version of Dengeki G 's Magazine named Dengeki G 's Festival ! Deluxe on June 30 , 2008 which had a focus on Little Busters ! Ecstasy . Along with again containing about eighty pages of information pertaining to the visual novel , the magazine also comes bundled with an ergonomic mousepad , a jigsaw puzzle , and a deck of playing cards . The third volume of another magazine in the Festival ! line , Dengeki G 's Festival ! Comic , was sold on July 26 , 2008 with Rin and <unk> on the cover , and the magazine came bundled with a hug pillowcase , a notepad , and a B2 size poster . 
 = = = Release history = = = 
 On June 1 , 2007 , a free game demo of Little Busters ! became available for download at Key 's official website . In the demo , the player is introduced to the characters of the Little Busters group in the game through a short visual novel sequence . The demo does not give the player the chance to interact with the scene presented , making the demo a short kinetic novel . The game was released in Japan as a limited edition version on July 27 , 2007 as a DVD playable on Windows PCs ; the regular edition was released on September 28 , 2007 . The limited edition contained an arrange album of some of the music featured in the game , and a 128 @-@ page visual guide book titled Natsume Kyousuke <unk> Ki ( <unk> ) . The book contained information and images on characters , background CGs , the art exhibition , images of the heroines published in various Japanese anime and gaming magazines , a question and answer section , information on the creators of the game , and lyrics of a couple of songs featured in the game . 
 Little Busters ! Ecstasy was released as a limited edition version on July 25 , 2008 as two DVDs playable only on a Windows PC ; the regular edition followed on September 26 , 2008 . The limited edition came bundled with a remix album of music featured in the game , and a 22 @-@ minute length CD containing a special broadcast of the Little Busters ! Internet radio show . An updated version , 1 @.@ 01 , for the limited edition of Ecstasy was released by Key for free on their website on September 22 , 2008 ; the regular edition of Ecstasy contains this update . An all ages version of Ecstasy for Windows was released by Key on July 31 , 2009 in a box set containing five other Key visual novels called Key 10th Memorial Box . 
 Prototype released a PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) port of Ecstasy titled Little Busters ! Converted Edition on December 24 , 2009 , which removed the adult elements of the game . The PS2 version was available to try at Key 10th Memorial Fes , an event held in commemoration of Key 's ten @-@ year anniversary between February 28 and March 1 , 2009 . A PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) version of Little Busters ! Converted Edition , also by Prototype , was released on November 25 , 2010 . The Windows and PS2 versions had voice acting for only the major characters , but the PSP version contained full voice acting for all of the characters other than Riki . Prototype also released a version of Little Busters ! Converted Edition ported to the PlayStation Vita ( PS Vita ) on March 22 , 2012 . Along with also having full voice acting , the PS Vita version contains <unk> larger CGs than the Windows edition , and the limited edition came bundled with a drama CD . Prototype released a PlayStation 3 ( PS3 ) version of Converted Edition with the additional content included in the previous consumer ports on March 20 , 2013 . An added feature in the PS3 version is a 3D rendering of the minigame in Saya 's route where the player must navigate a labyrinth . A downloadable version of the PS3 release via the PlayStation Store was released by Prototype on May 29 , 2013 . 
 Key released an all ages version of Ecstasy titled Little Busters ! Perfect Edition ( リトルバスターズ ! <unk> ) on November 30 , 2012 for Windows . The Perfect Edition contains the additional content featured in the consumer ports , and came bundled with additional merchandise including : an expanded reprint of Natsume Kyousuke <unk> Ki , a CD containing a special recording of the Internet radio show Little Busters ! R , Microsoft Gadgets , wallpapers , a Rin Natsume @-@ themed system sounds package for Windows which uses dialogue of Tomoe Tamiyasu — the voice of Rin , and nine promotional cards from the trading card games Weiß Schwarz , Chaos TCG and Megami Engage . Little Busters ! will be released in English . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Books and publications = = = 
 A series of 12 short stories were serialized in the Japanese bishōjo magazine Dengeki G 's Magazine , published by ASCII Media Works . The stories , under the collective title Official Episode Collection , were published in two batches : the first six stories were published between the March 2006 and August 2006 issues , while the second batch of six were serialized between the October 2006 and March 2007 issues . In each of the two batches , one of the six stories centered on one of the six heroines , and featured illustrations by Itaru Hinoue and Na @-@ Ga . The stories were written by the respective scenario writer for each girl : Jun Maeda wrote Rin 's , Leo Kashida wrote Mio 's , Yūto Tonokawa wrote Komari 's and Yuiko 's , and Chika Shirokiri wrote Haruka 's and Kudryavka 's stories . Key released five volumes of another series of official short stories , written by the original scenario staff and titled Little Busters ! SS , on iOS and Android devices between November 1 , 2012 and March 7 , 2013 . 
 A single @-@ volume light novel anthology was released by Ichijinsha on January 25 , 2008 under their DMC Novel imprint titled Little Busters ! Novel Anthology . The anthology was written by six authors , and illustrated by six artists . Four volumes of a short story compilation series by several authors titled Little Busters ! SSS were published by Harvest between April and November 2008 . Harvest published a novel by Tasuku <unk> titled Little Busters ! Saigusa Haruka no <unk> ( リトルバスターズ ! <unk> , Little Busters ! Haruka Saigusa 's Trouble Record Book ) in September 2008 . Ten volumes of another short story compilation series by several authors called Little Busters ! Ecstasy SSS were published by Harvest between January 2009 and October 2010 . Five volumes of an adult novel series titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy H & H written by several authors were published by Harvest between February and June 2009 . Harvest published a novel by Osamu Murata titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy : Bokura no <unk> Sensō ( リトルバスターズ ! エクスタシー <unk> , Little Busters ! Ecstasy : Our School Festival War ) in March 2009 . 
 Two volumes of a short story anthology compilation series written by Shin 'ichirō Kodama , Ken 'ichi Itoi , and Kachō titled <unk> . ( <unk> 。 , <unk> . ) were released between May and July 2009 . Paradigm published a light novel anthology character series in three volumes titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy Anthology between February and June 2010 . Harvest published a light novel anthology character series in three volumes titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy Character Anthology between June and December 2010 . Harvest published an illustrated short story anthology titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy 4 @-@ Page Short Story Collection in October 2010 . Paradigm published two volumes of a light novel collection between December 2010 and April 2011 . Paradigm published a light novel based on Kudryavka , written by Masayuki Ogura and illustrated by Ayumu Shōji , on September 28 , 2012 . Paradigm also published a light novel under their VA Bunko imprint , written by Mariko Shimizu and illustrated by Zen , on October 30 , 2013 . 
 An art book titled Little Busters ! Perfect Visual Book ( リトルバスターズ ! パーフェクトビジュアルブック , Ritoru Basutāzu ! <unk> Bijuaru Bukku ) was released on December 20 , 2007 . Published by ASCII Media Works , the 206 @-@ page , hard @-@ cover book contains a compilation of the published and promotional art from the visual novel , detailed character profiles and memo sections , and an overview of the visual novel 's plot . Also included are all the CG scenes from the game , concept illustrations , staff interviews , and a short story " ' Our ' Morning " ( 「 <unk> 」 <unk> , ' Bokura ' no Asa ) written by Yūto Tonokawa . A short section also includes the sheet music and lyrics of the vocal songs featured in the game . Included with the book were two pencil boards . The statistics of the battle equipment used in the mini @-@ games are listed on one of the boards . Another art book titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy Perfect Visual Book ( リトルバスターズ ! エクスタシー パーフェクトビジュアルブック , Ritoru Basutāzu ! Ekusutashī <unk> Bijuaru Bukku ) was released on December 19 , 2008 by ASCII Media Works . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 A four @-@ panel comic strip manga , titled Little Busters ! The 4 @-@ koma and illustrated by Yūya <unk> , was serialized between the March 2006 and March 2010 issues of ASCII Media Works ' Dengeki G 's Magazine . Some chapters begin as a normal manga layout and follow with comic strips . An " extra " chapter was published in the ninth volume of Dengeki G 's Festival ! on June 30 , 2007 , and special chapters of the manga have been published in ASCII Media Works 's manga magazine Dengeki G 's Festival ! Comic . Four tankōbon volumes were released between August 27 , 2007 and April 27 , 2010 , published by ASCII Media Works under their Dengeki Comics EX imprint . <unk> also illustrates the Little Busters ! EX The 4 @-@ koma four @-@ panel comic strip manga , which began serialization in the June 2010 issue of Dengeki G 's Magazine . The manga ended serialization in the magazine 's May 2014 issue and continued serialization in Dengeki G 's Comic between the June and December 2014 issues . Four volumes for Little Busters ! EX The 4 @-@ koma were released between February 26 , 2011 , and January 27 , 2015 . 
 A third manga , titled Little Busters ! and illustrated by Nobuyuki Takagi , was serialized in Dengeki G 's Festival ! Comic between November 26 , 2007 and October 25 , 2013 . Six volumes of Takagi 's Little Busters ! manga were released between April 27 , 2009 and December 21 , 2013 . A fourth manga , titled Little Busters ! and illustrated by <unk> <unk> , was serialized between the May 2008 and April 2010 issues of Kadokawa Shoten 's magazine Comp Ace and was referred to as the " official Little Busters ! comic " . Two volumes were released for <unk> 's Little Busters ! manga : the first on September 26 , 2008 , and the second on April 22 , 2010 . 
 A fifth manga adaptation , titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy : Saya Tokido School Revolution ( リトルバスターズ ! エクスタシー <unk> <unk> <unk> ) and illustrated by Zen , was serialized in Dengeki G 's Festival ! Comic between January 26 , 2009 and February 23 , 2010 . A single volume of Saya Tokido School Revolution was released on April 27 , 2010 . Zen also illustrated the Little Busters ! Ecstasy : Sasami Sasasegawa Black Cat Fantasia ( リトルバスターズ ! エクスタシー <unk> <unk> Cat <unk> ) manga , which was serialized in Dengeki G 's Festival ! Comic between June 26 , 2010 and April 26 , 2011 . A single volume of Sasami Sasasegawa Black Cat Fantasia was released on May 27 , 2011 . Zen later illustrated the Little Busters ! Ecstasy : Kanata Futaki My Minroud ( リトルバスターズ ! EX <unk> 〜 My Minroud 〜 ) manga as well , which was serialized in Dengeki G 's Festival ! Comic between June 23 , 2011 and June 26 , 2012 . A single volume of Kanata Futaki My Minroud was released on August 27 , 2012 . Zen also illustrates the manga Little Busters ! End of Refrain , which began serialization in the November 2012 issue of Dengeki G 's Magazine . The manga ended serialization in the magazine 's May 2014 issue and continued serialization in Dengeki G 's Comic between the June 2014 and January 2015 issues . Four volumes of End of Refrain were released between March 27 , 2013 and January 27 , 2015 . 
 A ninth manga , titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy : <unk> Wandering ( リトルバスターズ ! エクスタシー <unk> <unk> ) and illustrated by Juri Misaki , was serialized between the May 2010 and January 2012 issues of Comp Ace . Three volumes of <unk> Wandering were released between September 25 , 2010 and December 26 , 2011 . A tenth manga , titled Little Busters ! Kudryavka Noumi ( リトルバスターズ ! <unk> ) and illustrated by Kazusa Yoneda , was serialized between the April 2011 and March 2013 issues of Ichijinsha 's Comic Rex . Four volumes for Kudryavka Noumi were released between August 27 , 2011 and March 27 , 2013 . An 11th , four @-@ panel comic strip manga , titled Little Busters ! Band Mission ( リトルバスターズ ! <unk> ) and illustrated by Misaki Sakura , began serialization in the August 2011 issue of Ichijinsha 's Manga 4 @-@ koma Palette . A 12th manga , titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy Heartful ( リトルバスターズ ! <unk> ) and illustrated by <unk> , was serialized between the May 2012 and December 2013 issues of ASCII Media Works ' Dengeki Hime . Three volumes of Little Busters ! Ecstasy Heartful were released between October 15 , 2012 and December 15 , 2013 . A 13th manga , titled Little Busters ! and illustrated by <unk> , was serialized between the November 2012 and July 2013 issues of Kadokawa Shoten 's Comptiq . Two volumes of <unk> 's Little Busters ! manga were released between March 9 and September 26 , 2013 . 
 There have also been many sets of manga anthologies produced by different companies and drawn by a multitude of different artists . Six volumes of the earliest anthology series , a collection of four @-@ panel comic strips released by Enterbrain under the title Magi @-@ Cu 4 @-@ koma Little Busters ! , were released between September 2007 and July 2008 under their MC Comics imprint . Three volumes of an anthology series released by Ichijinsha under the title Little Busters ! Comic Anthology were released between October 2007 and July 2008 under their DNA Media Comics imprint . Three volumes of an anthology series released by Ohzora under the title Little Busters were released between November 2007 and January 2008 under their Twin Heart Comics imprint . Another anthology was released in a single volume by Harvest on December 20 , 2007 titled Ike ! Ike ! Bokura no Little Busters ! ( <unk> ! <unk> ! <unk> ! , Go ! Go ! Our Little Busters ! ) . A manga anthology titled Little Busters ! Comic A La Carte ( リトルバスターズ ! コミックアラカルト ) appeared in Comp Ace . 
 Enterbrain released 17 volumes of a collection of four @-@ panel comic strips under the title Magi @-@ Cu 4 @-@ koma Little Busters ! Ecstasy between November 2008 and August 2012 . Four volumes of an anthology titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy Comic Anthology were released by Ichijinsha between November 2008 and August 2011 . Ichijinsha released 10 volumes of the anthology Little Busters ! Ecstasy Ecstatic Anthology between July 2009 and November 2013 . An anthology published by Brain Navi titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy 4 @-@ koma Maximum ( リトルバスターズ ！ エクスタシー <unk> , Ritoru Basutāzu ! Ekusutashī 4 @-@ koma MAXIMUM ) was released in December 2008 . Another anthology titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy Comic A La Carte ( リトルバスターズ ！ エクスタシー コミックアラカルト ) appeared in Comp Ace and a single volume was released in April 2010 . Two volumes of a manga anthology based on the Little Busters ! Ecstasy H & H novel anthologies were released by Harvest in June and August 2010 . 
 ASCII Media Works released two volumes of an anthology titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy Comic Anthology between December 2012 and February 2013 . Enterbrain released three volumes of a collection of four @-@ panel comic strips under the title Magi @-@ Cu 4 @-@ koma Little Busters ! Re : play between December 2012 and March 2013 . Ichijinsha published an anthology drawn by Haruka <unk> titled Ring Ring Busters ! in January 2013 . Ichijinsha published an anthology titled TV Anime Little Busters ! Comic Anthology in March 2013 . Each of the anthology series are written and drawn by an average of 20 people per volume . 
 = = = Internet radio shows = = = 
 An Internet radio show to promote Little Busters ! called Natsume Brothers ! ( <unk> ! , Natsume Burazāzu ! ) had a pre @-@ broadcast on June 9 , 2008 , and started regular broadcasting on June 23 , 2008 . The show was hosted by Tomoe Tamiyasu and Hikaru Midorikawa , who voice Rin and Kyousuke Natsume from Little Busters ! , for the first 35 broadcasts . Starting with the following broadcast on March 2 , 2009 , the show 's title was changed to Natsume Brothers ! ( 21 ) ( <unk> ! ( 21 ) , Natsume Burazāzu ! ( 21 ) ) , and a third host was added , Miyako Suzuta , who voices Kudryavka Noumi from Little Busters ! . The show 's final broadcast , episode 170 , was on October 24 , 2011 . The show was streamed online every Monday , and was produced by the Japanese Internet radio station Onsen . 
 An exclusive 22 @-@ minute broadcast of the show was included with the first press release of Little Busters ! Ecstasy sold on July 25 , 2008 . Four CD compilation volumes containing the 35 episodes of Natsume Brothers ! ( including the pre @-@ broadcast ) were released between September 24 , 2008 and March 26 , 2009 . Another 15 CD compilation volumes containing most of the 170 episodes of Natsume Brothers ! ( 21 ) were released between June 26 , 2009 and February 24 , 2012 ; episodes 64 through 98 of Natsume Brothers ! ( 21 ) were not sold in CD compilation volumes . An exclusive broadcast of Natsume Brothers ! ( 21 ) was included with the release of the PlayStation 2 version of the game , Little Busters ! Converted Edition , on December 24 , 2009 . 
 A second Internet radio show to promote the anime adaptation titled Little Busters ! R broadcast 99 episodes between October 5 , 2012 and September 12 , 2014 . Like the previous radio show , it was normally hosted by Tamiyasu , Midorikawa and Suzuta . However , once a month , the show was hosted by Midorikawa and <unk> Canna , who voices Masato Inohara . The show was streamed online every Friday and was produced by Hibiki and Onsen . The 99 episodes were released on 11 compilation volumes between January 30 , 2013 and January 28 , 2015 . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 A 26 @-@ episode anime TV series adaptation , directed by Yoshiki Yamakawa and produced by J.C.Staff , aired in Japan between October 6 , 2012 and April 6 , 2013 on Tokyo MX . The series was also streamed by Crunchyroll with English subtitles . The screenplay was written by Michiru Shimada , and chief animator Haruko Iizuka based the character design used in the anime on Itaru Hinoue 's and Na @-@ Ga 's original designs . The anime series was released on nine BD / DVD compilation volumes between December 26 , 2012 and August 28 , 2013 by Warner Home Video in limited and regular editions . A BD containing an original video animation ( OVA ) episode was available for mail order to those who bought all nine limited edition BD / DVD volumes . The anime has been licensed by Sentai Filmworks for release in North America . Section23 Films released the first BD / DVD collection on November 19 , 2013 . Hanabee Entertainment has licensed the series in Australia and New Zealand for a January 2014 release on BD and DVD . 
 The staff and cast from the anime returned for a 13 @-@ episode second season titled Little Busters ! Refrain , which mainly covers the final scenario in the visual novel . It aired between October 5 and December 28 , 2013 on AT @-@ X. The episodes were released on seven BD / DVD compilation volumes between January 29 and July 30 , 2014 by Warner Home Video in limited and regular editions . Refrain has also been licensed by Sentai Filmworks for release on home video in 2015 . A series of eight OVA episodes titled Little Busters ! EX , based on the Ecstasy version of the game , are included on the BD / DVD releases of Refrain . 
 For the first season , the opening theme is " Little Busters ! ( TV animation ver . ) " and the ending theme is " Alicemagic ( TV animation ver . ) " . Both songs are sung by Rita and are remixes of the theme songs featured in the original visual novel . For Refrain , the opening theme is " Boys be Smile " by Suzuyu and the ending theme is " Kimi to no <unk> Mono " ( <unk> ) by Ayaka Kitazawa . For Little Busters ! EX , the opening theme is " Little Busters ! EX " by Rita and the ending theme " <unk> Asa ni wa Kimi ga Tonari ni " ( <unk> ) by Suzuyu . The rest of the soundtrack for both anime series is sampled from albums released for the visual novels , Little Busters ! Original Soundtrack and Little Busters ! Ecstasy Tracks , and the Little Busters ! Refrain Original Soundtrack . 
 = = Music = = 
 The visual novel Little Busters ! has six main theme songs , starting with the opening theme " Little Busters ! " , sung by Rita . There are four different ending themes ; three depend on what heroine 's story is completed , and the last is the game 's final ending theme . The first ending theme for Yuiko 's story is " Song for friends " , which is also used as the first ending theme of the Refrain scenario . The ending theme for Komari and Haruka is " Alicemagic " , which is also used as the second ending theme for Yuiko . The ending theme for Kudryavka and Mio is " <unk> Hare " ( <unk> , Clear Weather After the Rain ) , and the final ending theme is " Little Busters ! ( Little Jumper Ver . ) " , which is used as the second ending theme of Refrain . One last theme song is an insert song played during Refrain called " Haruka Kanata " ( <unk> , Faraway ) . The insert song and each of the ending themes are also sung by Rita . While not a theme song , the ending theme for Rin 's scenario is the background music track " Regret " composed by PMMK . Seven of the main characters from Little Busters ! have background music leitmotifs — the original six heroines , and Kyousuke Natsume . Rin 's theme is " Ring Ring Ring ! " ; Komari 's theme is " Mahō no Ensemble " ( <unk> , Magic Ensemble ) ; Haruka 's theme is " <unk> Otome no <unk> " ( <unk> , Grief of a Noisy Girl ) ; Kudryavka 's theme is " Exotic <unk> " ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) ; Yuiko 's theme is " <unk> <unk> " ( <unk> , Heart @-@ colored Capriccio ) ; Mio 's theme is " Hikari ni <unk> " ( <unk> , Approaching Light ) ; lastly , Kyousuke 's theme is " Boys Don 't Cry " . 
 Little Busters ! Ecstasy features a remixed version of " Little Busters ! " as the game 's opening theme called " Little Busters ! ( Ecstasy Ver . ) " . The song is a remixed version of the remix included in the album Rockstar Busters ! . Ecstasy also features remixed versions of the ending themes " Song for friends " and " Alicemagic " . The former is a remix version featuring less lyrics and is renamed to " Song for friends ( No Intro Ver . ) " , while the latter is the remix included on Rockstar Busters ! , but renamed to " Alicemagic ( Rockstar Ver . ) " . The remix of " Alicemagic " is used as the ending theme for Kanata 's and Sasami 's stories , and the remix of " Song for friends " is used as a background music track . A new theme song featured in Ecstasy is Saya 's ending theme " Saya 's Song " and is sung by Lia . Saya 's leitmotif is called " Kakeru " ( <unk> , Run ) and is a remix version of the song " <unk> " ( <unk> , Run ) on Riya 's 2005 album Love Song released by Key Sounds Label . Kanata 's leitmotif is " Will & Wish " , and Sasami 's theme is " Neko to Garasu to Marui Tsuki " ( <unk> , Cat , Glass , and the Round Moon ) . 
 A maxi single titled " Little Busters ! " was released in May 2007 . This first single contained " Little Busters ! " , " Haruka Kanata " , and " Alicemagic " in original and instrumental versions . As with Key 's previous works ( excluding Planetarian : The Reverie of a Little Planet ) , a music album came bundled with the limited edition release of the game ; the album , released on July 27 , 2007 , was called <unk> and contained arranged versions of 10 tracks of the game 's music . Eight of the tracks were background music while the last two were remix versions of " Little Busters ! " and " Haruka Kanata " . The game 's original soundtrack was first released in August 2007 at Comiket 72 containing three discs with 53 tracks . Of the 53 total tracks , three were left out of the visual novel . The original soundtrack was re @-@ released in Japanese stores on September 28 , 2007 . Two more albums were released at Comiket 73 in December 2007 : another arrange album titled Rockstar Busters ! and an image song single called " Rin no <unk> na Koi no Uta / Mission : Love sniper " sung by Tomoe Tamiyasu , the voice actress who voiced Rin in the game . 
 In February 2008 , a trance remix album of Little Busters ! themes titled OTSU Club Music Compilation Vol.2 was released by OTSU — a disc jockey unit composed of a number of different remix artists . An EP was released in May 2008 containing original and remix versions of " Little Busters ! " , " Faraway " , and " Alicemagic " ; the remix versions are from the second OTSU Club Music Compilation album . A remix album titled Ontology containing arranged versions of nine tracks from Little Busters ! Ecstasy was released bundled with the limited edition release of that game on July 25 , 2008 . A soundtrack containing the additional music tracks in Ecstasy titled Little Busters ! Ecstasy Tracks was released in August 2008 at Comiket 74 . An image song single called " Saya no <unk> Requiem / Saya 's Song " sung by Harumi Sakurai , the voice actress who voiced Saya in Little Busters ! Ecstasy , was released in February 2009 as a limited edition , and for general sale in March 2010 . Two more image song singles were released in December 2009 at Comiket 77 : " Raison / Pickles o <unk> <unk> " sung by Keiko Suzuki who voiced Kanata Futaki in Little Busters ! , and " Neko to Garasu to Marui Tsuki / Alicemagic ( Aroma Tablet mix ) " sung by Tomoe Tamiyasu who voiced Sasami Sasasegawa . 
 A remix album titled Deejay Busters ! , featuring tracks from Little Busters ! , Ecstasy and Kud Wafter , was released in May 2011 . A single sung by Rita was released in October 2012 for the first anime series titled " Little Busters ! / Alicemagic " , which contains the anime 's opening and ending themes in original , short , and instrumental versions . A piano arrange album titled <unk> , which also features tracks from Little Busters ! , Ecstasy and Kud Wafter , was released in April 2013 . A single sung by Suzuyu was released in October 2013 for the Little Busters ! Refrain anime series titled " Boys be Smile / <unk> Asa ni wa Kimi ga Tonari ni " , which contains the anime 's opening theme . A single sung by Ayaka Kitazawa was released in November 2013 for the Refrain anime series titled " Kimi to no <unk> Mono / <unk> no Tsubasa " , which contains the anime 's ending theme . A soundtrack containing tracks featured in the Refrain anime titled Little Busters ! Refrain Original Soundtrack was released in December 2013 at Comiket 85 . A compilation album titled Little Busters ! Perfect Vocal Collection mainly containing previously released vocal tracks for the visual novels and anime adaptations was released in April 2014 . Each of the albums released were on Key 's record label Key Sounds Label . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Getchu.com hosts a yearly voting poll called the " Getchu.com Bishōjo Game Ranking " where game users vote online for the best games of the previous year in several different categories . For the 2007 ranking , the categories were : overall , scenario , theme songs , background music , visuals , gameplay system , and heroines . In February 2008 , users cast votes for more than 470 different titles released in 2007 , and among the rankings , Little Busters ! ranked first in all categories aside from visuals ( placing third ) , and gameplay system ( placing second ) . Rin ranked as the number one most popular heroine , while Kudryavka ranked fourth , and Komari ranked 13th . For the 2008 ranking , the categories were : overall , scenario , gameplay system , graphics , opening theme video , vocal theme songs , background music , individual characters , individual voices , and game title naming . 
 In early 2009 , users of Getchu.com cast votes for more than 400 different titles released in 2008 , and among the rankings , Little Busters ! Ecstasy ranked second overall , second in scenario , third in gameplay system , twelfth in graphics , fifth in opening theme video , third in vocal theme songs , second in background music , fifth ( Saya Tokido ) and tenth ( Kudryavka Noumi ) for individual characters , first ( <unk> 's role as Saya Tokido ) and sixth ( Tomoe Tamiyasu 's role as Rin Natsume ) for individual voices , and second for game title naming . The PS Vita port in 2012 was reviewed by the Japanese video game magazine Famitsu , which gave it an overall score of 30 / 40 ( out of the four individual review scores of 8 , 8 , 7 , and 7 ) . 
 In a review of the first six episodes of the anime adaptation , Carl Kimlinger of Anime News Network gave Little Busters ! a C rating overall , criticizing its overuse of the " same gags over and over again , with predictably diminishing returns . " He praised the " guy @-@ to @-@ girl ratio " compared to other series made by Key , but notes that Riki is a " bland main character . " Kimlinger panned J.C.Staff 's " unexciting professionalism " and for " animation that is only good enough to avoid looking cheap . " 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 From June to July 2007 , the limited edition of Little Busters ! ranked second in national PC game pre @-@ orders in Japan . The limited edition version of Little Busters ! ranked first in terms of national sales of PC games in Japan in July 2007 . The game ( which includes the regular edition ) ranked consecutively seven more times achieving sales rankings of 14th , 25th twice in a row , 37th , 39th twice in a row , and 41st between the months of August 2007 and February 2008 . According to public sales information published at Gamasutra , taken from the Japanese Amazon website , Little Busters ! was the number one top seller between July 26 , 2007 and August 17 , 2007 for Japanese PC game sales . The game dropped to third highest the following week taken from August 24 , 2007 . Little Busters ! was the highest selling game for the month of July 2007 on Getchu.com , and dropped to twelfth in the ranking the following month . Regardless of the drop in ratings earlier in the year , Little Busters ! ended up as the most widely sold game of 2007 on <unk> 
 From May to July 2008 , Little Busters ! Ecstasy ranked first in national PC game pre @-@ orders in Japan . The limited edition version of Little Busters ! Ecstasy ranked first in terms of national sales of PC games in Japan in July 2008 . Ecstasy sold quickly in Akihabara on its first day of sales , and by the end of the first day about half the stores were already sold out of the game . By the next day , the majority of stores in Akihabara were sold out of Ecstasy . Only four days after Ecstasy 's initial release , Key reported that many stores were already sold out of the game as well . Three months after Ecstasy 's initial release , Key reported that the game had already sold over 100 @,@ 000 units . Little Busters ! Perfect Edition ranked at 18th in terms of national sales of PC games in Japan in November 2012 . 
 The nine anime Blu @-@ ray Disc ( BD ) compilation volumes for the anime 's first season ranked in the top ten on Japan 's Oricon weekly BD sales chart . The first three volumes sold over 8 @,@ 000 units each in their first week of sales . For Little Busters ! Refrain , the seven BD volumes ranked in the top ten on Japan 's Oricon weekly BD sales chart . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 A cover version of " Little Busters ! " appeared in the sequel of Front Wing 's visual novel Time Leap titled Time Leap Paradise released on July 24 , 2009 . Rin and Kudryavka were featured as characters in Illusion 's Characolle ! 3D animation program series . The program 's third entry , Characolle ! Key , was released on March 4 , 2011 , and included the characters ' models and scenery assets based on the locals in Little Busters ! as part of the package . 
 After the success of Little Busters ! and Ecstasy , an adult spin @-@ off titled Kud Wafter was developed by Key and released on June 25 , 2010 . Set directly after the events of Little Busters ! , the story follows Riki and Kudryavka as they start to see more of each other in a romantic relationship at the onset of summer vacation . A mobile app game for iOS and Android titled Little Busters ! Card Mission , produced through VisualArt 's and distributed via Mobage , was released on April 24 , 2013 . The player collects cards of varying rarity featuring Little Busters ! characters , obtained through completing various minigame missions , to form a team . The player then trains his or her team to improve their statistics and eventually challenge others who play the game . Paradigm published the first volume of an art book series for the game titled Little Busters ! Card Mission <unk> on April 29 , 2014 . A Blu @-@ ray Disc game , produced by VisualArt 's and titled Nishizono Mio <unk> Satsujin Jiken ? ( <unk> ? , Mio Nishizono 's Locked @-@ Room Murder Case ? ) , was released on the first BD / DVD compilation volume for the Little Busters ! Refrain anime series on January 29 , 2014 . 
 = Rinaldo ( opera ) = 
 Rinaldo ( HWV 7 ) is an opera by George Frideric Handel , composed in 1711 , and was the first Italian language opera written specifically for the London stage . The libretto was prepared by Giacomo Rossi from a scenario provided by Aaron Hill , and the work was first performed at the Queen 's Theatre in London 's Haymarket on 24 February 1711 . The story of love , war and redemption , set at the time of the First Crusade , is loosely based on Torquato Tasso 's epic poem Gerusalemme liberata ( " Jerusalem Delivered " ) , and its staging involved many original and vivid effects . It was a great success with the public , despite negative reactions from literary critics hostile to the contemporary trend towards Italian entertainment in English theatres . 
 Handel composed Rinaldo quickly , borrowing and <unk> music from operas and other works that he had composed during a long stay in Italy in the years 1706 – 10 , during which he established a considerable reputation . In the years following the premiere , he made numerous amendments to the score . With its spectacular vocal and orchestral passages , Rinaldo is regarded by critics as one of Handel 's greatest operas . Of its individual numbers , the soprano aria " Lascia ch 'io pianga " has become a particular favourite , and is a popular concert piece . 
 Handel went on to dominate opera in England for several decades . Rinaldo was revived in London regularly up to 1717 , and was a revised version in 1731 ; of all Handel 's operas , Rinaldo was the most frequently performed during his lifetime . After 1731 , however , the opera was not staged for more than 200 years . Renewed interest in baroque opera during the 20th century led to the first modern professional production in Handel 's birthplace , Halle , Germany , in 1954 . The opera was mounted sporadically over the following thirty years ; after a successful run at New York 's Metropolitan Opera in 1984 , performances and recordings of the work have become more frequent worldwide . The opera 's tercentenary in 2011 brought a modernized production at the Glyndebourne Festival . 
 = = Background = = 
 Handel began to compose operas in Hamburg , where he spent the years 1703 – 06 ; his principal influences were Johann Mattheson and Reinhard Keiser . At that time , German opera as a genre was still not clearly defined ; in Hamburg the term Singspiel ( " song @-@ play " ) rather than opera described music dramas that combined elements of French and Italian opera , often with passages of spoken German dialogue . The music was , in the words of historian Donald Jay Grout , " tinged with the serious , heavy formality of Lutheran Germany " . The first of Handel 's early works in the German style was Almira , a considerable success when it was premiered on 8 January 1705 . Over the next three years Handel composed three more operas in the German style , but all of these are now lost . However , fragments of the music from these works have been identified in later operas . 
 In autumn 1706 Handel went to Italy . He stayed for long periods in Florence , Rome , Naples and Venice , making frequent visits to the opera houses and concert halls . He obtained introductions to leading musicians , among them Arcangelo Corelli , Alessandro and Domenico Scarlatti , and Agostino Steffani , and met numerous singers and performers . From these acquaintances Handel learned the essential characteristics of Italian music , in particular ( according to Dean and Knapp ) " fluency in the treatment of Italian verse , accurate declamation and flexible harmonic rhythm in recitative , ... drawing the necessary distinction between vocal and instrumental material and , above all , the release of [ his ] wonderful melodic gift " . Handel 's first Italian opera , Rodrigo , showed an incomplete grasp of Italian style , with much of Keiser 's Hamburg influence still evident ; it was not a success when premiered in Florence , in late November or early December 1707 . He followed this by a lengthy visit to Rome , where opera performances were then forbidden by papal decree , and honed his skills through the composition of cantatas and oratorios . In Rome , Handel met Cardinal Vincenzo Grimani , a diplomat and spare @-@ time librettist ; the result of this meeting was a collaboration which produced Handel 's second Italian opera , Agrippina . After this work 's triumphant premiere at the Teatro San Giovanni Grisostomo in Venice , on 26 December 1709 , Handel became , says biographer P. H. Lang , " world famous and the idol of a spoiled and knowledgeable audience " . 
 This sudden recognition led to eager competition for Handel 's services . Among those most keen to employ him was Prince Georg Ludwig , the Elector of Hanover and future King George I of Great Britain . In June 1710 Handel accepted the appointment of Kapellmeister to Georg 's Hanover court , under terms that gave him considerable scope to pursue his own interests . On the basis of this freedom , in late 1710 Handel left Hanover for London , possibly in response to an earlier invitation from members of the English nobility . By 1711 , informed London audiences had become familiar with the nature of Italian opera through the numerous pastiches and adaptations that had been staged . The former Royal Academy of Music Principal , Curtis Price , writes that the popularity of these pieces was the result of a deliberate strategy aimed at the suppression of English opera . Handel 's music was relatively unknown in England , though his reputation from Agrippina was considerable elsewhere . A short " Italian Dialogue " he had written in honour of Queen Anne 's birthday was well received when performed at St James 's Palace on 6 February 1711 . 
 In London , by means which are not documented , Handel secured a commission to write an Italian opera for the Queen 's Theatre in the Haymarket ( it became the " King 's Theatre " after King George I 's accession in 1714 ) . This theatre , designed and built by Sir John Vanbrugh , had become London 's main opera house ; its manager , Aaron Hill , intended to mount the first Italian opera written specifically for London and had engaged an all @-@ Italian company for the 1710 – 11 opera season . Hill employed an Italian poet and language teacher , Giacomo Rossi , to write a libretto based on a scenario that Hill prepared himself . As his subject Hill chose Gerusalemme liberata , an epic of the First Crusade by the 16th @-@ century Italian poet Torquato Tasso ; the opera was called Rinaldo , after its main protagonist . Hill was determined to exploit to the full the opportunities for lavish spectacle afforded by the theatre 's machinery ; his aim , according to Dean and Knapp , was " to combine the virtuosity of Italian singing with the extravagance of the 17th century masque " . 
 = = Roles = = 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Place : in and around the city of Jerusalem during the First Crusade 
 Time : 1099 
 Act 1 
 The Crusader army under Goffredo is laying siege to Jerusalem , where the Saracen king Argante is confined with his troops . With Goffredo are his brother Eustazio , his daughter Almirena , and the knight Rinaldo . As Goffredo sings of the coming victory , Rinaldo declares his love for Almirena , and Goffredo confirms that she will be Rinaldo 's bride when Jerusalem falls . Almirena urges Rinaldo to fight boldly and assure victory . As she departs , a herald announces the approach of Argante from the city . Eustazio surmises that the king fears defeat ; this seems to be confirmed when Argante , after a grandiose entrance , requests a three @-@ day truce to which Goffredo graciously assents . After Goffredo leaves , Argante ponders his love for Armida , the Queen of Damascus who is also a powerful sorceress , and considers the help her powers might bring him . As he muses , Armida arrives from the sky in a fiery chariot . She has divined that the Saracens ' only chance of victory lies in vanquishing Rinaldo , and has the power , she claims , to achieve this . 
 The scene changes to a garden , with fountains and birds , where Rinaldo and Almirena are celebrating their love . They are interrupted as Armida appears , and wrests Almirena from Rinaldo 's embrace . Rinaldo draws his sword to defend his lover , but a black cloud descends to envelop Armida and Almirena , and they are borne away . Rinaldo mourns the loss of his loved one . When Goffredo and Eustazio arrive they comfort Rinaldo , and propose they visit a Christian magician who may have the power to save Almirena . Rinaldo , left alone , prays for strength . 
 Act 2 
 A sea shore . As Goffredo , Eustazio and Rinaldo near the magician 's lair , a beautiful woman calls from her boat , promising Rinaldo that she can take him to Almirena . Two mermaids sing of love 's delights , and urge Rinaldo to go in the boat . He hesitates , unsure what to do , and his companions attempt to restrain him . Angry at the abduction of his loved one , Rinaldo enters the boat , which immediately sails off . Goffredo and Eustazio are shocked at Rinaldo 's impulsiveness and believe that he has deserted their cause . 
 In Armida 's palace garden , Almirena mourns her captivity . Argante joins her and , overcome by her beauty , confesses that he now loves her . He promises that as proof of his feelings he will defy Armida 's wrath and secure Almirena 's freedom . Meanwhile , Rinaldo is brought before the triumphant Armida . As he demands that Almirena be set free , Armida finds herself drawn to his noble spirit , and declares her love . When he angrily rejects her she uses her powers to assume Almirena 's form , but Rinaldo suspects trickery , and departs . Armida , resuming her own appearance , is furious at her rejection yet retains feelings of tender love . She decides on another attempt to ensnare Rinaldo , and transforms herself back into Almirena 's shape , but then encounters Argante . Believing her to be Almirena , Argante repeats his earlier promises of love and freedom . Swiftly resuming her own form , Armida denounces his infidelity and vows vengeance . Argante defiantly confirms his love for Almirena and declares that he no longer needs Armida 's help . She departs in a fury . 
 Act 3 
 A mountainside , at the magician 's cavern . Goffredo and Eustazio are told by the Magician that Almirena is being held captive in Armida 's palace at the mountain @-@ top . Ignoring the magician 's warning that they will need special powers , the pair set off for the palace but are quickly driven back by Armida 's monsters . The magician then gives them magic wands that transcend Armida 's power , and they set off again . This time they overcome the monsters , but as they reach the gates of the palace it disappears , leaving them clinging to a rock in the midst of a stormy sea . They climb the rock and descend out of sight . 
 In the palace garden Armida prepares to kill Almirena . Rinaldo draws his sword , but Armida is protected from his wrath by spirits . Suddenly Goffredo and Eustazio arrive , but as they touch the garden with their wands it disappears , leaving them all on an empty plain with the city of Jerusalem visible in the distance . Armida , after a last attempt to kill Almirena , also disappears as Rinaldo strikes her with his sword . The remaining four celebrate their reunion , while Goffredo announces that the attack on Jerusalem will begin the next day . 
 In the city , Argante and Armida , in danger from a common enemy , become reconciled and prepare their troops for battle . Goffredo 's army advances , and battle finally commences . After a struggle for supremacy , Jerusalem falls to Goffredo ; Argante is overcome and captured by Rinaldo , while Armida is taken by Eustazio . Rinaldo and Almirena celebrate their love and forthcoming marriage . Armida , accepting her defeat , breaks the wand which is the source of her evil power and together with Argante embraces Christianity . Goffredo expresses his forgiveness to his beaten foes and sets them free , before victors and vanquished join in a chorus of reconciliation . 
 Revisions , 1717 and 1731 
 The opera was frequently revised , most particularly in 1717 and in 1731 ; modern performances are usually a conflation of the versions available . Up to and including 1717 , these changes had no significant effect on the plot . In the 1731 version , however , in Act 2 Armida imitates Almirena 's voice rather than assuming her appearance , and Argante declares his love to Almirena 's portrait rather than to her face . In Act 3 the marches and the battle scene are cut ; Armida and Argante remain unrepentant and vanish in a chariot drawn by dragons before the conclusion . 
 = = Compositional history = = 
 In a letter dedicating the new opera to Queen Anne , Hill wrote of his choice of story : " I could not chuse a finer Subject than the celebrated story of Rinaldo and Armida " . He had , however , exercised " a Poet 's Privilege " , to render Tasso 's work suitable for the stage . This " privilege " moved the opera 's story a long way from Tasso 's original . Hill invented a new heroine , Almirena , to provide the main love interest with the hero Rinaldo , and the relationship between Rinaldo and Armida scarcely figures in the opera . Likewise , the affair between Argante and Armida is Hill 's creation , as are the conversions to Christianity , the latter possibly a sop to English <unk> . Rossi was required to turn the elaborate scenario into verses , a relatively light task which , he said , was " the delivery of a few evenings " . Nevertheless , Rossi complained that Handel hardly gave him time to write : " To my great wonder I saw an entire Opera set to music by that surprising genius , with the greatest degree of perfection , in two weeks " . Price argues that Rossi 's role was beyond that of a mere <unk> , quoting Hill 's words of praise for Rossi in the preface to the libretto , which suggest that Rossi was the senior partner in the birth of the libretto . Price also points to the likely influences on the structure of Rinaldo from two British semi @-@ operas — George Granville 's The British Enchanters , and Purcell 's King Arthur . The transformations of characters to others ' shapes , Price contends , is likely derived from John Dryden 's play Amphitryon . 
 Handel 's speed of composition was assisted by his inclusion of arias and other numbers from his earlier Italian works , among them " Bel <unk> " and " Basta che sol " from Agrippina , " <unk> gli <unk> " from the dramatic cantata <unk> , Galatea e <unk> , and the mermaids ' song " Il <unk> maggio " from the cantata <unk> il passo . Almirena 's aria " Lascia ch 'io pianga " had appeared in the oratorio Il trionfo del Tempo e del <unk> . The suitability of some of these insertions has been questioned by later commentators ; Dean and Knapp cite Argante 's " <unk> gli <unk> " , with its references to the hissing snakes of Alecto and the howls of Scylla , as " ludicrously inappropriate " to accompany the king 's grand Act 1 entrance . Many other numbers — Dean and Knapp estimate two @-@ thirds of the arias — were adapted and partly recomposed from earlier sources . 
 In the years between the 1711 premiere and the 1717 revival , Handel made various adjustments to the score and the vocal parts , often to accommodate the requirements of new singers . Details of these changes are difficult to establish since the performing librettos and scores for these years no longer exist . For 1717 , more significant revisions were made ; the role of Eustazio was merged with that of Goffredo , and Argante 's part was rewritten to accommodate an alto voice . Thus in this revival all the principal parts were sung in high voice ranges . Handel 's revisions for the 1731 revival were even more radical , since they not only affected individual musical numbers but involved alterations in the plot . The production was advertised " With New Scenes and <unk> " , but many of the changes involved reducing or eliminating the pyrotechnics and special effects that had characterised the original production . The only significant new music in the 1731 production is a long accompanied recitative for Rinaldo , though other numbers are changed or cut . Goffredo becomes a tenor , Armida a contralto , the Herald and the Magician become basses . Dean and Knapp summarise the 1731 revisions as " a striking illustration of the seeming vandalism with which Handel could treat his works in revival " . 
 = = Performance history and reception = = 
 = = = Early performances = = = 
 The 19th @-@ century music critic George Hogarth wrote of Rinaldo that " [ t ] he romantic interest of the subject , the charms of the music , and the splendour of the spectacle , made it an object of general attraction " . Its premiere at the Queen 's Theatre on 24 February 1711 , possibly under Handel 's direction , was a triumphant success . A further 12 performances were immediately scheduled ; at the end of the run , popular demand was such that two more were added . Notwithstanding this enthusiasm , the financial strains of such a grand production led to legal actions against Hill from unpaid craftsmen . Nine days after the premiere the Lord Chamberlain 's Office revoked the impresario 's licence . Under Hill 's successors the opera was played at the theatre in most seasons until 1716 – 17 , by which time it had totalled 47 performances , far more than any other opera at the Queen 's . 
 The public 's general enthusiasm for the opera was not shared by the writers Joseph Addison and Richard Steele , who used the pages of their new journal , The Spectator , to pour scorn and ridicule on the work . Addison may have been motivated by his own failure , a few years previously , to establish a school of English opera with Rosamund , on which he had collaborated with the composer Thomas Clayton . It was absurd , he wrote , that theatre audiences should be exposed to entire evenings of entertainment in a foreign tongue : " We no longer understand the language of our own stage " . Addison did , however , praise the singing of Nicolo Grimaldi , the celebrated alto castrato known as " Nicolini " , in the title role . Steele compared the production unfavourably to a Punch and Judy show , particularly criticising certain bungled scene changes and the poor quality of effects such as thunder and lightning . Hogarth made light of such comments : " Notwithstanding the influence which the Spectator influenced over the taste and manners of the age , its attacks ... seem to have had little effect in turning people from the entertainment " . 
 Some sources have suggested that the opera was performed in Dublin in March or April 1711 , though according to Dean and Knapp there is no record of such an occasion . In November 1715 a version mainly in German was performed in Hamburg . This production , based on a translation by the playwright Barthold Feind , proved to be very popular and was revived in the city on numerous occasions during the 1720s . A pastiche of the opera , with additional numbers by Leonardo Leo , was presented by Leo at the Royal Court in Naples in 1718 , with Nicolini singing his original role . 
 After 1716 – 17 , Rinaldo was not seen on the London stage until 1731 , when it was revived in its revised form at the King 's Theatre . During these years Handel 's industry was such that he was producing a new opera for this theatre every nine months . The 1731 production of Rinaldo received six performances , bringing the London total for the work to 53 in Handel 's lifetime , the most for any of his operas . After 1731 Handel had fewer stage successes , and performances of his operas became rarer . Changes in taste and style combined , as Grout concludes , to " thrust [ the operas ] into ill @-@ deserved oblivion " , as a result of which Rinaldo was not staged anywhere for two hundred years . 
 = = = Modern revivals = = = 
 The first 20th @-@ century production of Rinaldo which can be specifically verified was a performance in London , in February 1933 , by pupils of the Hammersmith Day Continuation School , though Dean and Knapp mention a shortened version , in Czech , at the Prague Conservatory in 1923 . The first modern professional performance was at the Halle Opera House in June 1954 , under Horst @-@ Tanu <unk> , as part of the Handel Festival . On 17 May 1961 the Handel Opera Society , directed by Charles Farncombe , staged the work at London 's Sadler 's Wells Theatre , a production that was revived four years later . The first American performance was a concert version at Carnegie Hall on 27 March 1972 , given by the Handel Society of New York , with Stephen Simon conducting and Beverly Wolff as Rinaldo . The first staging of the opera in America was at the Houston Grand Opera under Lawrence Foster , in October 1975 , with Marilyn Horne in the title role , a part with which she would become particularly associated . 
 In July 1982 Horne sang the part alongside John Alexander 's Goffredo and Samuel Ramey 's Argante , in a National Arts Centre ( NAC ) production in Ottawa directed by Frank Corsaro . The performance , with Mario Bernardi conducting the NAC Orchestra , was applauded by Montreal Gazette critic Eric McLean for its fine music making and its displays of " architectural and sartorial splendour " . Eighteen months later , on 19 January 1984 Bernardi and Corsaro , with Horne , Ramey and Benita Valente from the Ottawa cast , brought the production to New York for the work 's debut at the Metropolitan Opera . The production was loaned to the Met for its centennial season by the National Arts Centre of Canada " in deep appreciation of the many years during which Canadians have enjoyed opera from the Met – on tour , on radio and in New York " . Donal Henahan in The New York Times praised all the singers in turn , with a special mention for Valente 's " plaintive and affecting " rendering of the popular aria " Lascia ch 'io pianga " . But , says Henahan , " the loudest cheers of the night went at last to the choreographer , Eugene Collins , and an incredibly nimble corps of tumbling warriors " . After ten performances at the Metropolitan Opera House the production was taken in May to Washington , D.C. , and toured in the US before returning to New York in June for several outdoors performances . 
 From the mid @-@ 1980s onwards , performances of Rinaldo became more frequent worldwide . In June 1989 it was staged at La Fenice in Venice , under John Fisher , again with Marilyn Horne . This production was criticised by critic and music scholar Stanley Sadie , in his review of the live recording , for straying too far from the composer 's original intentions , particularly in the rearrangement of material and the extent of cuts . Singers were , Sadie says , allowed too much freedom to ornament their vocal lines ; some of the cadenzas were " preposterous " . The opera reached Australia in 1999 , at the Sydney Opera House under Patrick Summers , and was performed there again in July – August 2005 under Trevor Pinnock , with Michael Chance as Rinaldo . The new century saw a number of performances across Europe , including an appearance at the Göttingen International Handel Festival in 2004 , with Nicholas <unk> conducting Concerto Köln . This production was well received by the public , but was criticised by Jochen <unk> of Opera News for poor staging , indifferent singing and a substandard performance from the orchestra . 
 Zurich Opera 's 2008 production , directed by Jens @-@ Daniel Herzog and conducted by William Christie , threw aside all convention by representing the action in a 21st @-@ century airport lounge and conference centre , with Rinaldo dressed in a double @-@ breasted navy blazer and needing a drink . " Characters go up and down on @-@ stage escalators , and the set spins to show various areas of the lounge and terminal . There is a dissection of a small , white furry animal , a large snake , some allusions to Bond girls and character transformations . The Christians pull guns on the Muslims at a signing ceremony " . It was , wrote Associated Press critic Ronald Blum , " outrageous – and entertaining " . A concert version of Rinaldo was given at the 2009 Edinburgh Festival , by the Bach Collegium Japan conducted by Masaaki Suzuki , with the Japanese soprano Maki Mori as Almirena . 
 During the opera 's tercentenary year in 2011 , the Glyndebourne Festival mounted a new production directed by Robert <unk> , designed by Gideon Davey , and conducted by Ottavio <unk> with the Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment in the pit . The production is set in a school where Rinaldo is a student , initially the victim of bullying , who enters into the world of the Crusades . The Glyndebourne Festival Opera brought a semi @-@ staged version of this production to the 2011 Proms . 
 = = Music = = 
 The amount of recycled music in Rinaldo is such that Dean and Knapp call it an " anthology " of the best works from Handel 's Italian period . Sadie raises the question of whether the opera 's dramaturgy is affected by the small amount of music written for its particular situations . He also comments on the problems raised for scholars by the extensive revisions to the music that took place during Handel 's lifetime , but suggests that the available admixture creates interesting opportunities in the preparation of modern performing versions . The initial popular success of Rinaldo was assisted by the employment of virtuoso singers , in particular Nicolini in the title role . This part has remained in its original pitch , though in his various revisions Handel transposed the music of other leading roles to different voice types . Thus Goffredo had originally been an alto part , but in the 1717 revisions became a tenor ; the Magician was transposed from alto castrato to bass , and Armida from soprano to contralto . 
 The music , Lang says , flows " beguilingly " from the spacious overture ; the quieter , emotional passages are illustrated evocatively , while in the more spectacular moments Handel 's innovative use of brass is exciting and inspiring . The sudden blast of trumpets which announces the Act 3 March provides , say Dean and Knapp , " an effect of splendour and exhilaration that time has not dimmed " . The harpsichord solos which decorate " Vo ' far guerra " in Act 2 were originally improvised on the keyboard by Handel during performances , and were extremely popular . They were remembered and written down by William Babell , and published later as separate pieces . Lang believes that in spite of the borrowings , and the hasty manner in which the work was put together , Rinaldo is one of Handel 's great operas . According to Dean and Knapp , no Italian opera heard in London to that point had been supported by such " majestic " orchestral forces . Critic Anthony Hicks describes the music , overall , as both " varied and excellent " . Dean and Knapp 's verdict is more equivocal . The music for the war and pageantry scenes , they say , is " brilliantly successful " , but in depicting the scenes concerned with magic , Handel misses the mark ; they suggest it was not until over 15 years later , with <unk> and Orlando , that he was able to represent the supernatural convincingly in music . 
 The opera begins in the key of F , and switches to G at the inception of the grove scene in Act 1 . Act 2 starts in E minor and ends in G. The final act begins and ends in B minor . According to Hicks the dominant character musically , except in Act 3 in which she barely sings , is Armida . Her entry cavatina " Furie <unk> " gives , says Hicks , " an immediate impression of fiery passion " , an energy and intensity demonstrated in her Act 2 " Ah <unk> " , and in her later vengeance aria which is the occasion of Handel 's harpsichord cadenzas . Armida 's Act 3 duet with Argante was the last duet with bass part that Handel wrote for 30 years . Of the other set pieces , Dean and Knapp highlight Rinaldo 's " Cara <unk> " as an example of Handel 's growing confidence with aria forms . " Or la tromba " is praised for the brilliance of its orchestration : 4 trumpets , drums , strings & oboes — the only aria Handel ever wrote for this combination . The melody for Almirena 's " Lascia ch 'io pianga " began its life as an Asian dance in Almira before appearing as an aria in the oratorio Il trionfo . From this simple tune and plain accompaniment Handel achieves an " intensely moving effect " in this , the best @-@ known of all the arias . 
 = = Arias and other musical numbers = = 
 = = = 1717 libretto and subsequent amendments = = = 
 The main musical numbers from the 1711 libretto are listed , together with changes and replacements from the two major revisions of 1717 and 1731 . Minor changes , transpositions , and alterations to recitative sections are not shown . New numbers introduced in 1717 and 1731 are listed separately . Other arias not listed may have been sung in Rinaldo during the years 1711 – 17 , but in the absence of contemporary evidence from scores or librettos the extent of such changes cannot be accurately ascertained . 
 = J @-@ Air = 
 J @-@ Air Co . , Ltd . ( <unk> , Kabushiki @-@ gaisha <unk> Ea ) , is a regional commuter airline with its headquarters in the Terminal Building in Nagoya Airfield and in <unk> , <unk> District , Aichi , Japan and its main hub at Nagoya Airfield . J @-@ Air previously had its headquarters in Ōmura , Nagasaki Prefecture . Its operations include scheduled passenger services to 16 destinations across regional Japan , under Japan Airlines ' flight numbers . The airline has a fleet 19 aircraft , consisting of Bombardier CRJ @-@ 200s and Embraer <unk> . 
 J @-@ Air is a wholly owned subsidiary of Japan 's flag carrier , Japan Airlines ( JAL ) and an affiliate member of the Oneworld alliance . The airline was founded on August 8 , 1996 , when JAL restructured JAL Flight Academy and J @-@ Air was separated ; and began operations as a separate entity from Hiroshima @-@ Nishi Airport on November 1 . Faced with limited opportunities for route expansion at Hiroshima , the airline relocated to its new home at Nagoya Airfield , after the opening of Chūbu Centrair International Airport , on February 17 , 2005 . In the fiscal year ended March 31 , 1999 , J @-@ Air , together with its sister airlines within the JAL Group , carried over 32 million passengers and over 1 @.@ 1 million tons of cargo and mail . 
 J @-@ Air has been reported by Japanese newspapers and television to be leaving Nagoya Airfield in a phased transition with many flights leaving October 2010 and all flight leaving from the Spring of 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 JAL Flight Academy ( <unk> ) was established by Japan Airlines ( JAL ) in August 1989 , as a flight training school subsidiary based at Omura Airport , Nagasaki . It provided conversion training for its flight engineers to become pilots . In April 1991 , a new division of <unk> was created to operate scheduled services to succeed the troubled Nishi Seto Airlink services , a commuter airline serving cities in western Japan . Since the introduction of the 19 @-@ seats Jetstream <unk> ( <unk> ) in September 1991 , the aircraft progressively replaced the Embraer EMB 110 <unk> inherited from Nishi Seto . 
 In August 1996 , JAL Flight Academy was restructured , J @-@ Air was separated and established as a wholly owned regional subsidiary airline of Japan Airlines on August 8 . On November 1 , the airline inaugurated its first flight from Hiroshima @-@ Nishi Airport and was building up service on smaller @-@ demand domestic routes , which larger aircraft could not serve economically . However , the local government subsidy was terminated at the end of the 2000 fiscal year and the airline was required to become self @-@ sufficient . As part of its domestic marketing strategy , JAL found a niche market where the 100 @-@ plus @-@ seats Boeing 737s were too large and frequent services were in demand , and began repositioning the airline . Fifty @-@ seats Bombardier CRJ @-@ 200s were introduced and progressively replaced the five <unk> until completion in August 2003 . 
 Despite the introduction of the Bombardier CRJ @-@ 200s , there were limited opportunities for route expansion from its home at Hiroshima @-@ Nishi Airport . The airline decided to move to Nagoya Airfield , after the opening of Chūbu Centrair International Airport . On February 17 , 2005 , J @-@ Air realized its dream and relocated to its new home at Nagoya Airfield . In order to strengthen the recognition of the JAL brand and improve customer convenience , the airline disposed its own flight numbers and changed to JAL flight numbers from April 1 , 2005 . 
 On April 1 , 2007 , J @-@ Air , together with four of its sister airlines within the JAL Group , joined Oneworld and became a Oneworld affiliate member . On June 18 , JAL signed a purchase agreement with Embraer for ten Embraer 170 jets , with options to acquire another five aircraft . The contract value was worth approximately US $ 435 million , if all the options are exercised . The aircraft was configured to seat 76 passengers in a single @-@ class layout and was designated for J @-@ Air . The first aircraft was delivered on October 3 , 2008 , received the type certification from the Japan Civil Aviation Bureau ( <unk> ) on October 27 and operated its first flight in February 2009 . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 J @-@ Air operates to the following destinations ( as of January 2013 ) : 
 Japan 
 Akita – Akita Airport 
 Aomori - Aomori Airport 
 Fukuoka – Fukuoka Airport Focus city 
 Iwate @-@ Hanamaki – Hanamaki Airport 
 <unk> - Kitakyushu Airport 
 Kōchi – Kōchi Ryōma Airport 
 Kumamoto – Kumamoto Airport 
 Kunisaki - Oita Airport 
 Miyazaki - Miyazaki Airport 
 <unk> – Nagasaki Airport 
 Osaka 
 Kansai International Airport 
 Osaka International Airport Hub 
 <unk> <unk> - <unk> @-@ <unk> Airport 
 Nagasaki - Nagasaki Airport 
 Niigata – Niigata Airport 
 Ōzora - Memanbetsu Airport 
 Sapporo – New Chitose Airport Hub 
 Sendai – Sendai Airport 
 Tokachi @-@ Obihiro – Tokachi @-@ Obihiro Airport 
 Tokyo - Haneda Airport Focus city 
 Yamagata - Yamagata Airport 
 Tokushima - Tokushima Airport 
 = = = Terminated destinations = = = 
 Japan – Fukushima , Hiroshima , Izumo , Kagoshima , Komatsu , Miyazaki , Ōita , Shizuoka , Tottori 
 = = Fleet = = 
 The J @-@ Air fleet consists of the following aircraft ( as of August 2014 ) : 
 = = = Fleet history = = = 
 Aircraft that have been in service with J @-@ Air are ( in alphabetical order ) : 
 Embraer EMB 110 <unk> 
 Jetstream 31 
 = = JAL Mileage Bank = = 
 JAL Mileage Bank ( JMB ) is the travel rewards program of JAL Group , including Japan Airlines , JALways , JAL Express , Japan Transocean Air , Japan Air Commuter , Hokkaido Air System and Ryukyu Air Commuter . The program 's airline partners also include JAL 's Oneworld partners , as well as Air France , China Eastern Airlines and Emirates . For the airline 's most frequent flyers , JMB offers Fly On Program , a frequent flyer service status program ; and JAL Global Club ( JGC ) , an exclusive club designed for experienced travelers . 
 The JMB program has no membership fee , and mileage will be valid to the last day of the 36th month following the month of the flight or transaction date . In addition , if a JMB member does not accumulate mileage within 36 months after becoming a member , or a JMB member 's account remains inactive at zero mileage for a consecutive 36 @-@ month period , JAL may withdraw or cancel the membership of such member . 
 = = = JMB Fly On Program = = = 
 The Fly On Program is the frequent flyer service status program and is divided into four membership levels , Crystal , Sapphire , JGC Premier and Diamond , based on the member 's travel in the last calendar year . Additionally , a minimum of four JAL Group flights on eligible fare classes are required . Members earn Fly On points on eligible fare classes on JAL Group and Oneworld member airlines . These are used to calculate the member 's eligibility for membership renewal , upgrade or downgrade during the membership year . Higher @-@ tiered members are provided with increased travel benefits such as bonus mileage , additional baggage allowance , priority boarding and airport lounge access . There are two phases to the Fly On Program service benefits ; one begins after two months following qualification for membership and the other begins from April of the following year . Membership is valid until 31 March of the second year following membership qualification . 
 = = = = Crystal = = = = 
 Crystal level is achieved or retained when the member earns 30 @,@ 000 Fly On Points or boarding more than 30 flights and minimum of 10 @,@ 000 Fly On Points . Services and benefits after two months of membership qualification include priority waitlisting , 50 percent bonus mileage , airport lounge access for Japan domestic flights with lounge coupons via mileage deduction , priority check @-@ in at Executive Class counters for international flights , JGC counters and priority baggage for class J on JAL Group domestic flights , 10 kg ( 22 lb ) or one piece of extra baggage allowance , priority boarding on international flights , priority airport standby and class J upgrade with class J coupon via mileage deduction . Services and benefits from April of the following year include 10 upgrade points for complimentary flight upgrades . JMB Crystal membership level is equivalent to Oneworld Sapphire tier status , which entitles members to Oneworld Ruby benefits when travelling on a Oneworld member airline . 
 = = = = Sapphire = = = = 
 Sapphire level is achieved or retained when the member earns 50 @,@ 000 Fly On Points or boarding more than 50 flights and minimum of 15 @,@ 000 Fly On Points . Additional services and benefits for Sapphire members after two months of membership qualification include 100 percent bonus mileage , JAL or Sakura Lounge access with one guest when flying on JAL Group airline flights . Priority check @-@ in at First Class counters for international flights and JGC counters for Japan domestic flights , priority baggage , 20 kg ( 44 lb ) or two pieces of extra baggage allowance and access to JAL Fast Security Lane . Additional services and benefits for Sapphire members from April of the following year include 20 upgrade points for complimentary flight upgrades . JMB Sapphire members will be invited to join the JGC , which is dedicated to cater for experienced travelers . JMB Sapphire membership level is equivalent to Oneworld Sapphire tier status , which entitles members to Oneworld Sapphire benefits when travelling on a Oneworld member airline . 
 = = = = JGC Premier = = = = 
 JGC Premier is achieved or retained when the member earns 80 @,@ 000 Fly On Points or boarding more than 80 flights and minimum of 25 @,@ 000 Fly On Points . Additional services and benefits for JGC Premier members after two months of membership qualification include mileage expiry suspension during membership period , First Class and Diamond / Premier Lounge access with one guest when flying on JAL Group airline flights , and priority check @-@ in at First Class counters and priority boarding for both international and domestic flights . Additional services and benefits for JGC Premier members from April of the following year include three complimentary transferable JAL and Sakura Lounge coupons , 30 upgrade points for complimentary flight upgrades , one complimentary JAL Hotels one night stay coupon , five complementary passes to the Century 21 Club and one flower gift coupon . JGC Premier membership level is equivalent to Oneworld Emerald tier status , which entitles members to Oneworld Emerald benefits when travelling on a Oneworld member airline . 
 = = = = Diamond = = = = 
 The highest membership level in the Fly On Program of the JAL Mileage Bank . Diamond level is achieved or retained when the member earns 100 @,@ 000 Fly On Points or boarding more than 120 flights and minimum of 35 @,@ 000 Fly On Points . Additional services and benefits for Diamond members after two months of membership qualification include 125 percent bonus mileage and any seat award tickets with double mileage deduction . Additional services and benefits for Diamond members from April of the following year include 40 upgrade points for complimentary flight upgrades , two complimentary JAL Hotels one night stay coupons and Century 21 Club membership . JMB Diamond membership level is equivalent to Oneworld Emerald tier status , which entitles members to Oneworld Emerald benefits when travelling on a Oneworld member airline . 
 = = = JAL Global Club = = = 
 The JAL Global Club is an exclusive club dedicated to catering to JAL Group 's most experienced and valuable travelers . Membership is available to JMB members who have earned 50 @,@ 000 Fly On Points or boarding more than 50 flights and minimum of 15 @,@ 000 Fly On Points . In addition , membership can be enrolled under JALCARD Club @-@ A , Club @-@ A Gold or JAL 's Diners Club membership after payment of an annual fee . Lifetime membership will be given as long as a one @-@ time qualifying member continues to pay the JALCARD annual fee . The Oneworld tier status as a JGC member will depend on the JMB Fly On program membership levels , with the following exception : JGC members will automatically attain Oneworld Sapphire status upon enrollment , regardless of the number of FLY ON Points accumulated in the previous calendar year . 
 JGC benefits include 3 @,@ 000 bonus miles for the first JAL Group eligible flight flown every year , JAL or Sakura Lounge access with one guest , priority baggage , 20 kg ( 44 lb ) or two pieces of extra baggage allowance , priority check @-@ in , personalized leather baggage tags , annual gifts of a calendar and a diary and exclusive use of member lounges at designated hotels . In addition , JALCARD Club @-@ A , Club @-@ A Gold and JAL Diners Club holders receive 35 percent JALCARD flight bonus mileage . 
 = SM UB @-@ 10 = 
 SM UB @-@ 10 was a German Type UB I submarine or U @-@ boat in the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. 
 UB @-@ 10 was ordered in October 1914 and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in November . UB @-@ 10 was a little under 28 metres ( 92 ft ) in length and displaced between 127 and 141 t ( 125 and 139 long tons ) , depending on whether surfaced or submerged . She carried two torpedoes for her two bow torpedo tubes and was also armed with a deck @-@ mounted machine gun . UB @-@ 10 was broken into sections and shipped by rail to Antwerp for reassembly . She was launched in February 1915 and commissioned as SM UB @-@ 10 in March . The U @-@ boat was the first of her class to commence operations when she entered service on 27 March 1915 . 
 UB @-@ 10 was the first boat assigned to the Flanders Flotilla , the unit in which she spent her entire career . Her first two commanders were Otto Steinbrinck and Reinhold Saltzwedel , fifth and eleventh , respectively , among the top @-@ scoring German submarine commanders of the war . UB @-@ 10 was credited with sinking 37 ships , about two @-@ thirds of them British fishing vessels . The first ship sunk , the neutral Dutch steamer Katwijk , provoked outrage in the Netherlands and helped turn Dutch public opinion against Germany . That sinking was also the impetus behind a renewed effort to avoid attacking neutral ships by U @-@ boats . In a 13 @-@ day span in July and August 1915 , UB @-@ 10 sank 23 ships , and by herself accounted for nearly all of the tonnage sunk by the Flanders Flotilla in the latter month . She was also responsible for sinking the British destroyer HMS Lassoo in August 1916 . UB @-@ 10 had two close calls with British submarines near the Schouwen Bank off Zeebrugge in 1916 and 1917 , but survived both . 
 By 1918 , UB @-@ 10 had been converted into a minelayer by the replacement of her torpedo tubes with four mine chutes . UB @-@ 10 was seriously damaged in a British air raid on Flanders in July 1918 , and was decommissioned in September 1918 in a worn out condition . She was not deemed seaworthy to sail to Germany when the bases in Flanders were being evacuated by the Germans in October 1918 and was scuttled off Zeebrugge in early October . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 After the German Army 's rapid advance along the North Sea coast in the earliest stages of World War I , the German Imperial Navy found itself without suitable submarines that could be operated in the narrow and shallow seas off Flanders . Project 34 , a design effort begun in mid @-@ August 1914 , produced the Type UB I design : a small submarine that could be shipped by rail to a port of operations and quickly assembled . Constrained by railroad size limitations , the UB I design called for a boat about 28 metres ( 92 ft ) long and displacing about 125 t ( 123 long tons ) with two torpedo tubes . 
 UB @-@ 10 was part of the initial allotment of seven submarines — numbered UB @-@ 9 to UB @-@ 15 — ordered on 15 October from AG Weser of Bremen , just shy of two months after planning for the class began . UB @-@ 10 was laid down by Weser in Bremen on 7 November . As built , UB @-@ 10 was 27 @.@ 88 metres ( 91 ft 6 in ) long , 3 @.@ 15 metres ( 10 ft 4 in ) abeam , and had a draft of 3 @.@ 03 metres ( 9 ft 11 in ) . She had a single 60 @-@ metric @-@ horsepower ( 44 kW ) Körting 4 @-@ cylinder diesel engine for surface travel , and a single 120 @-@ metric @-@ horsepower ( 88 kW ) Siemens @-@ Schuckert double @-@ acting electric motor for underwater travel , both attached to a single propeller shaft . Her top speeds were 7 @.@ 45 knots ( 13 @.@ 80 km / h ; 8 @.@ 57 mph ) , surfaced , and 6 @.@ 24 knots ( 11 @.@ 56 km / h ; 7 @.@ 18 mph ) , submerged . At more moderate speeds , she could sail up to 1 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 800 km ; 1 @,@ 700 mi ) on the surface before refueling , and up to 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) submerged before recharging her batteries . Like all boats of the class , UB @-@ 10 was rated to a diving depth of 50 meters ( 160 ft ) , and could completely submerge in 33 seconds . 
 UB @-@ 10 was armed with two 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedoes in two bow torpedo tubes . She was also outfitted for a single 8 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine gun on deck . UB @-@ 10 's standard complement consisted of one officer and thirteen enlisted men . 
 After work on UB @-@ 10 was complete at the Weser yard , she was readied for rail shipment . The process of shipping a UB I boat involved breaking the submarine down into what was essentially a knock down kit . Each boat was broken into approximately fifteen pieces and loaded on to eight railway flatcars . In early 1915 , the sections of UB @-@ 10 were shipped to Antwerp for assembly in what was typically a two- to three @-@ week process . After UB @-@ 10 was assembled and launched on 20 February , she was loaded on a barge and taken through canals to Bruges where she underwent trials . 
 = = Early career = = 
 The submarine was commissioned into the German Imperial Navy as SM UB @-@ 10 on 15 March 1915 under the command of Oberleutnant zur See ( Oblt.z.S. ) Otto Steinbrinck the 26 @-@ year @-@ old former skipper of U @-@ 6 . On 27 March , UB @-@ 10 became the first UB I boat to begin operations , and the first U @-@ boat attached to the Flanders Flotilla ( German : U @-@ boote des Marinekorps U @-@ Flotille Flandern ) when it was organized on 29 March . When UB @-@ 10 began operations , Germany was in the midst of its first submarine offensive , begun in February . During this campaign , enemy vessels in the German @-@ defined war zone ( German : Kriegsgebiet ) , which encompassed all waters around the United Kingdom , were to be sunk . Vessels of neutral countries were not to be attacked unless they definitively could be identified as enemy vessels operating under a false flag . 
 The UB I boats of the Flanders Flotilla were initially limited to patrols in the Hoofden , the southern portion of the North Sea between the United Kingdom and the Netherlands . UB @-@ 4 made the first sortie of the flotilla on 9 April , and UB @-@ 10 departed on her first patrol soon after . On 14 April , Steinbrinck and UB @-@ 10 sank their first ship , the 2 @,@ 040 @-@ ton Dutch steamer Katwijk , 6 nautical miles ( 11 km ; 6 @.@ 9 mi ) west of the North Hinder Lightship . Although no one was killed in the attack , the attack on a neutral ship sailing between neutral ports — Katwijk was sailing from Rotterdam to Baltimore — provoked outrage among the Dutch population . The sinking of Katwijk and other Dutch ships sharply turned public opinion in the Netherlands against Germany . As a direct result of UB @-@ 10 's sinking of Katwijk , and to avoid further provoking the Dutch or other neutrals ( primarily the United States ) , the German government issued an order on 18 April that no neutral vessels were to be attacked . The German government later paid compensation for the sinking of Katwijk . 
 It was early June before UB @-@ 10 sank her next ship . The Belgian ship <unk> , carrying a load of iron ore from Algiers for Middlesbrough , was torpedoed and sunk off North Foreland by Steinbrinck on the 7th . Of the 23 persons on board the 1 @,@ 886 @-@ ton ship , only 6 were saved . <unk> 's master , his wife , and six @-@ year @-@ old daughter , the first mate , the pilot , and 12 other crewmen perished . 
 After UB @-@ 10 's sister boat UB @-@ 6 pioneered a route through British anti @-@ submarine nets and mines in the Straits of Dover on 21 and 22 June , boats of the flotilla began to patrol into the English Channel . UB @-@ 2 , UB @-@ 5 , and UB @-@ 10 soon followed with patrols in the Channel , but were hampered by fog and bad weather . Even though none of the boats sank any ships , by successfully completing their voyages , they helped further prove the feasibility of defeating the British countermeasures in the Straits of Dover . 
 On 30 June , Steinbrinck and the crew of UB @-@ 10 , which was back patrolling in the North Sea , had a busy day when they sank eight British fishing vessels ranging from 43 gross register tons ( GRT ) while patrolling between 20 and 35 nautical miles ( 37 and 65 km ; 23 and 40 mi ) east of Lowestoft . All eight of the sunken ships were smacks — sailing vessels traditionally rigged with red ochre sails — which were stopped , boarded by crewmen from UB @-@ 10 , and sunk with explosives . 
 = = = August 1915 = = = 
 UB @-@ 10 began August 1915 by capturing and burning Alert — another British fishing smack — off Lowestoft on the 1st . The same day , Fulgens , a 2 @,@ 512 @-@ ton collier , was torpedoed one nautical mile ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) from <unk> ; the crew of the ship — UB @-@ 10 's largest victim to @-@ date — were all saved . 
 On 8 August , UB @-@ 10 captured and sank two more smacks — Arbor Vitae and Xmas Rose — off Lowestoft , and followed that up by sinking the largest ship of her career two days later . The 4 @,@ 243 GRT Rosalie , headed from North Shields for San Francisco , was torpedoed 3 nautical miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ; 3 @.@ 5 mi ) from the <unk> Buoy . A contemporary news account reported that Rosalie had been beached , but was apparently irreparably damaged ; all her crew , however , was saved . 
 On 11 August , one day after sinking Rosalie , Steinbrinck and the crew of UB @-@ 10 bettered their 30 June activities by sinking ten fishing smacks off Cromer . All ten ships , which ranged in size from 41 to 62 tons , were boarded and sunk by explosives . With these ten ships , the August tally for Steinbrinck and UB @-@ 10 was 7 @,@ 309 tons , which accounted for nearly all of the 7 @,@ 709 tons sunk by Flanders Flotilla boats that month . In addition , counting the ships sunk at the end of July , UB @-@ 10 sank 23 ships in a 13 @-@ day span , nearly half the 55 ships sunk by the flotilla in both July and August . 
 = = = End of the first submarine offensive = = = 
 On 18 August , the chief of the Admiralstab , Admiral Henning von Holtzendorff , issued orders suspending the first offensive . The suspension was in response to American demands after German submarines had sunk the Cunard Line steamer Lusitania in May 1915 , along with other high profile sinkings in August and September . Holtzendorff 's directive ordered all U @-@ boats out of the English Channel and the South @-@ Western Approaches and required that all submarine activity in the North Sea be conducted strictly along prize regulations . UB @-@ 10 did not sink another ship for the next four months . 
 On 20 December , UB @-@ 10 sank the last two ships under Steinbrinck 's command . The 512 @-@ ton Belford and the 1 @,@ 153 @-@ ton Huntly were both torpedoed off Boulogne ; there were no casualties on Belford , but two men on Huntly died in the attack . The Huntly was the former German hospital ship Ophelia , which had been seized by English naval forces and renamed the previous year . 
 On 13 January 1916 , Steinbrinck was succeeded by Oblt.z.S. Reinhold Saltzwedel in command of UB @-@ 10 . Steinbrinck , who went on to command three more U @-@ boats during the war — UB @-@ 18 , UC @-@ 65 , and UB @-@ 57 — continued the successes he had in command of UB @-@ 10 . He was fifth among the top @-@ scoring German submarine commanders of the war , with a tally of 210 @,@ 000 tons of shipping to his credit . Saltzwedel , Steinbrinck 's 26 @-@ year @-@ old replacement , was an eight @-@ year veteran of the Kaiserliche Marine and a first @-@ time U @-@ boat commander . 
 = = Second submarine offensive = = 
 By early 1916 , the British blockade of Germany was beginning to have an effect on Germany and her imports . The Royal Navy had stopped and seized more cargo destined for Germany than the quantity of cargo sunk by German U @-@ boats in the first submarine offensive . As a result , the German Imperial Navy began a second offensive against merchant shipping on 29 February . The final ground rules agreed upon by the German Admiralstab were that all enemy vessels in Germany 's self @-@ proclaimed war zone would be destroyed without warning , that enemy vessels outside the war zone would be destroyed only if armed , and — to avoid antagonizing the United States — that enemy passenger steamers were not to be attacked , regardless of whether in the war zone or not . 
 UB @-@ 10 's first victim in the new offensive ( and Saltzwedel 's first as a commander ) , came on 19 March when the U @-@ boat torpedoed Port Dalhousie , a 1 @,@ 744 @-@ ton Canadian steamer , 2 nautical miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ; 2 @.@ 3 mi ) from the Kentish Knock Lightvessel . Nineteen men on the ship — headed from Middlesbrough to Nantes with a cargo of steel billets — were lost in the attack ; the mate , a pilot , and five crewmen were rescued . About two weeks later , UB @-@ 10 torpedoed and sank the Norwegian steamer Peter <unk> in nearly the same location ; fourteen men on the 1 @,@ 081 @-@ ton cargo ship were lost . Near the end of April 1916 , Admiral Reinhardt Scheer , the newest commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the High Seas Fleet , called off the merchant shipping offensive and ordered all boats at sea to return , and all boats in port to remain there . Port Dalhousie and Peter <unk> were the only ships sunk by UB @-@ 10 during the six @-@ week offensive . 
 = = Grand Fleet ambush attempts = = 
 In mid @-@ May , Scheer completed plans to draw out part of the British Grand Fleet . The German High Seas Fleet would sortie for a raid on Sunderland , luring the British fleet across " ' nests ' of submarines and mine @-@ fields " . In support of the operation , UB @-@ 10 and five other Flanders boats set out at midnight 30 / 31 May to form a line 18 nautical miles ( 33 km ; 21 mi ) east of Lowestoft . This group was to intercept and attack the British light forces from Harwich , should they sortie north to join the battle . Unfortunately for the Germans , the British Admiralty had intelligence reports of the departure of the submarines which , coupled with an absence of attacks on shipping , aroused British suspicions . 
 A delayed departure of the German High Seas Fleet for its sortie ( which had been redirected to the Skagerrak ) and the failure of several of the U @-@ boats stationed to the north to receive the coded message warning of the British advance caused Scheer 's anticipated ambush to be a " complete and disappointing failure " . UB @-@ 10 sighted the Harwich forces , but they were too far away to mount an attack . The failure of the submarine ambush to sink any British capital ships allowed the full Grand Fleet to engage the numerically inferior High Seas Fleet in the Battle of Jutland , which took place 31 May – 1 June . 
 In mid @-@ June , Saltzwedel was transferred to UC @-@ 10 , and — as was the case with Steinbrinck — went on become one of the top @-@ scoring U @-@ boat commanders of the war , placing eleventh on the list with 150 @,@ 000 tons to his credit . After Saltzwedel , UB @-@ 10 was assigned a new commander about every two to three months through the end of the war . Saltzwedel 's immediate replacement on UB @-@ 10 was Kapitänleutnant ( Kptlt . ) Gustav Buch , who led the boat in sinking her only warship , the British destroyer Lassoo on 13 August ; Lassoo was torpedoed off the Maas Lightvessel and sank with the loss of six men . Later in August , UB @-@ 10 was fortunate enough to avoid attack by a British submarine when departing Zeebrugge . On the morning of 21 August , the outbound UB @-@ 10 had a rendezvous with the homeward @-@ bound UC @-@ 10 off the North Hinder Lightship and exchanged information . UC @-@ 10 parted company with UB @-@ 10 at about 13 : 30 and resumed her course for Zeebrugge , but was torpedoed and sunk by HMS <unk> , which had been lurking about the Schouwen Bank off Zeebrugge . 
 = = Unrestricted submarine warfare = = 
 Since the early stages of the war , the Royal Navy had blockaded Germany , preventing neutral shipping from reaching German ports . By the time of the so @-@ called " turnip winter " of 1916 – 17 , the blockade had severely limited imports of food and fuel into Germany . Among the results were an increase in infant mortality and as many as 700 @,@ 000 deaths attributed to starvation or hypothermia during the war . With the blockade having such dire consequences , Kaiser Wilhelm II personally approved a resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare to begin on 1 February 1917 to help force the British to make peace . The new rules of engagement specified that no ship was to be left afloat . 
 Under these new rules of engagement , UB @-@ 10 , now under the command of Kptlt . Erich von Rohrscheidt , first sank the Dutch steamer <unk> on 27 March . When encountered by UB @-@ 10 , <unk> was found " derelict and badly damaged " after shelling by German destroyers <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ; von Rohrscheidt launched a coup de grâce at the stricken ship and sent it down 20 nautical miles ( 37 km ; 23 mi ) east @-@ northeast of the North Hinder Lightvessel . 
 As UB @-@ 10 was returning to Zeebrugge in early April , she was attacked by a British submarine near the area where she had escaped from HMS <unk> the previous August . HMS C7 , which had been waiting off the Schouwen gas buoy , launched a torpedo at a U @-@ boat at 03 : 30 on 5 April . Although authors R. H. Gibson and Maurice Prendergast report that C7 sank UC @-@ 68 with that torpedo , C7 had in fact fired upon UB @-@ 10 , and the explosion noted by C7 was her own torpedo prematurely exploding ; UB @-@ 10 was able to continue on and make port in Zeebrugge . Later in the month , von Rohrscheidt sank two Dutch ships on the 24th and 25th : Minister Tak Van <unk> , a 1 @,@ 106 @-@ ton steamer headed for Harlingen was sent down 20 nautical miles ( 37 km ; 23 mi ) off <unk> ; the sailing ship Elizabeth was sunk between Lowestoft and Zeebrugge the following day . 
 On 20 August , UB @-@ 10 — with Oblt.z.S. Fritz Gregor at the helm — sank <unk> , a British vessel , 6 nautical miles ( 11 km ; 6 @.@ 9 mi ) from Southwold . The 3 @,@ 588 @-@ ton ship , sent down with her cargo of steel and 14 of her crew , was the second largest sunk by UB @-@ 10 . Early the next month , Gregor led the boat in sinking three more fishing vessels : the Belgian Jeannot and the British Unity on the 5th ; and the British Rosary on the 6th . These were the last ships sunk by UB @-@ 10 . 
 = = Conversion to minelayer = = 
 UB @-@ 10 and three sister boats , UB @-@ 12 , UB @-@ 16 , and UB @-@ 17 , were all converted to minelaying submarines by 1918 . The conversion involved removing the bow section containing the pair of torpedo tubes from each U @-@ boat and replacing it with a new bow containing four mine chutes capable of carrying two mines each . In the process , the boats were lengthened to 105 feet ( 32 m ) , and the displacement increased to 147 t ( 145 long tons ) on the surface , and 161 t ( 158 long tons ) below the surface . Exactly when this conversion was performed on UB @-@ 10 is not reported , but UB @-@ 12 was converted in late 1916 . 
 From late February to mid @-@ May 1918 , UB @-@ 10 was commanded by Oblt.z.S. Hans Joachim Emsmann . The 25 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> would later be notable as the commander of UB @-@ 116 , the last U @-@ boat sunk during the war , and as the namesake of the 5th U @-@ boat Flotilla ( German : 5 . <unk> " <unk> " ) of the Kriegsmarine in World War II . 
 On 2 July , UB @-@ 10 and UB @-@ 88 were both seriously damaged during a heavy British air raid on German @-@ held bases in Flanders . During other raids , considerable damage to harbour facilities delayed repairs and impaired the flotilla 's ability to operate at full strength . Although sources do not indicate whether the damage to UB @-@ 10 's was repaired after this attack or not , by early September the boat was considered unfit for service and was decommissioned on the 12th . 
 After the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive started on 26 September and the Allies began to drive back the German lines , plans were made to evacuate Flanders and dismantle the naval facilities at Bruges , Zeebrugge , and Ostende . All the vessels that were seaworthy were ordered to depart Flanders for Germany on 1 October ; those unable to make the journey under their own power were to be destroyed . UB @-@ 10 was one of four U @-@ boats left behind . On 5 October , a maintenance crew scuttled UB @-@ 10 off the Zeebrugge Mole at position 51 ° 21 ′ N 3 ° 12 ′ E. 
 = = Ships sunk or damaged = = 
 = Pennsylvania @-@ class battleship = 
 The Pennsylvania class consisted of two super @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the United States Navy just before the First World War . The ships were named Pennsylvania and Arizona , after the American states of the same names . They constituted the United States ' second battleship design to adhere to the " all or nothing " armor scheme , and were the newest American capital ships when the United States entered the First World War . 
 The Nevada @-@ class battleships represented a marked increase in the United States ' dreadnought technology , and the Pennsylvania class was intended to continue this with slight increases in the ships ' capabilities , including two extra 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) / 45 caliber guns and improved underwater protection . The class was the second standard type battleship class to join the United States Navy , along with the preceding Nevada and the succeeding New Mexico , Tennessee and Colorado classes . 
 In service , the Pennsylvania class saw limited use in the First World War , as a shortage of oil fuel in the United Kingdom meant that only the coal @-@ burning ships of Battleship Division Nine were sent . Both were sent across the Atlantic to France after the war for the Paris Peace Conference of 1919 , and were then transferred to the Pacific Fleet before being significantly modernized from 1929 to 1931 . For the remainder of the inter @-@ war period , the ships were used in exercises and fleet problems . Both Pennsylvania and Arizona were present during the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor . Arizona was sunk in a massive magazine explosion and was turned into a memorial after the war , while Pennsylvania , in dry dock at the time , received only minor damage . After a refit from October 1942 to February 1943 , Pennsylvania went on to serve as a shore bombardment ship for most of the remainder of the war , an exception being the October 1944 Battle of Surigao Strait , the last battle ever between battleships . Pennsylvania was severely damaged by a torpedo on 12 August 1945 , the day before the cessation of hostilities . With minimal repairs , she was used in Operation Crossroads , part of the Bikini atomic experiments , before being expended as a target ship in 1948 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The preceding Nevada @-@ class battleships represented a leap forward from previous American battleship technology and from most contemporary foreign designs . These ships were the first in the world to employ the " all or nothing " armor scheme that characterized every succeeding American battleship . Devised with the knowledge that engagement ranges between battle fleets was growing greater as main battery sizes increased , the system moved away from previous designs that used heavy , medium , and light armor , in favor of using only heavy armor to protect vital areas on the ship . The new system envisioned that , at long ranges , ships would be attacked with only armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) projectiles , <unk> only by heavy armor . Medium or light armor would only serve to detonate the shells . By removing gun turrets and reducing the overall protected length of the ship , the navy 's designers were able to devote the weight savings to the belt , as well as extra deck armor to protect against plunging shells . 
 In issuing desired specifications for the design that would become the Nevada class , the navy 's General Board asked for triple gun turrets , i.e. three guns mounted per turret . They were very unsatisfied with the awkward placement required on classes preceding the Nevadas , which had five and six two @-@ gun turrets — yet moving back to the four two @-@ gun turrets of the South Carolina class would be a significant loss in firepower . Although a triple turret was first proposed in American professional magazines in 1901 and briefly considered for the South Carolinas , it was not even in the experimental stage — the first turret was authorized in 1911 and would not be ready until months after contracts for the new ships would be signed with the shipbuilders . The decision to go ahead with the turret was a calculated gamble , but proved to be a qualified success : the only issue came with shell interference when the center and outside guns were fired simultaneously , which was easily solved by delaying the firing of the center barrel by a small fraction of a second . The major benefit , though , came from the weight savings from the reduction of an armored barbette and turret . These gains were used in heavier armor , making the " all or nothing " concept a reality . 
 The Nevadas were also the first American battleships to use exclusively oil fuel , which had greater thermal efficiency than firing with coal or coal sprayed with oil . The cumulative effect of the change was measured by the navy as a fifty @-@ five percent increase in steam production per pound of fuel ( in a design for an oil @-@ fired version of the New York class ) . This would give oil @-@ fired vessels additional range , an important consideration for ships based in the Pacific Ocean , but the United States Navy 's Bureau of Construction and Repair ( C & R ) pointed out what it saw as the unfortunate side effects , including a lower center of gravity , higher metacentric height , and the loss of coal bunkers , which were employed as part of the armor protection . However , just a few years later oil tanks below the waterline were considered indispensable parts of the underwater armor scheme employed in American dreadnoughts . 
 = = Design = = 
 The General Board 's call for a new 1913 fiscal year battleship design was sent in June 1911 with the recent Nevada innovations in mind . They desired a ship with a main battery of twelve 14 @-@ inch guns in triple turrets , a secondary battery of twenty @-@ two 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) guns , a speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) , and armor equivalent to that of the Nevadas . C & R 's first sketch was unsatisfactory ; their lengthy design of 625 feet ( 191 m ) and 30 @,@ 000 long tons ( 30 @,@ 000 t ) actually had less armor than the Nevadas , with a 12 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 320 mm ) belt . 
 The design process was marked by various efforts to meet the General Board 's specifications with only a moderate increase in tonnage over the Nevada class . Between January and March 1912 , thirteen sketches were prepared for consideration by C & R with reciprocating or turbine engines that traded either speed or metacentric height for armor . Some later designs gave up a half knot of speed to free up about 500 long tons ( 510 t ) , enough to thicken the belt from 13 @.@ 5 to 15 inches ( 340 to 380 mm ) and the barbettes to 14 inches . The choice between double or triple turrets was also still an issue , as the Nevada class had not been completed yet . The Bureau of Ordnance was in favor of waiting for test results , rather than risking reverting to two @-@ gun 14 @-@ inch turrets or moving up to two @-@ gun 16 @-@ inch turrets . 
 In March 1912 , C & R proposed their seventh , eighth , ninth , and tenth designs to the General Board for approval . The eighth and ninth designs were the ones to give up a half knot of speed , while the tenth was a design with four triple turrets and 1 @,@ 200 long tons ( 1 @,@ 200 t ) lighter than the Nevada class ships . In April , the General Board chose the seventh design , which satisfied all of their requirements , albeit on the largest displacement , 31 @,@ 300 long tons ( 31 @,@ 800 t ) . The length was fixed at 630 feet ( 190 m ) , the beam at 93 feet ( 28 m ) , and the draft at 28 @.@ 5 feet ( 8 @.@ 7 m ) . Steam turbines gave the design 30 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 22 @,@ 700 kW ) and 21 knots , while the main armor belt was 13 @.@ 5 inches tapering to 8 inches ( 203 mm ) at the ends . This design was further refined and emerged in a completed state in September . The delay was partially due to tests on the proposed armor , which were completed in June 1912 and resulted in significant alterations to the Pennsylvania class ' underwater protection . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The Pennsylvania @-@ class ships were significantly larger than their predecessors , the Nevada class . They had a waterline length of 600 feet ( 182 @.@ 9 m ) , an overall length of 608 feet ( 185 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 97 feet ( 29 @.@ 6 m ) ( at the waterline ) , and a draft of 29 feet 3 inches ( 8 @.@ 9 m ) at deep load . This was 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) longer than the older ships . Its designed standard and full load displacements were 31 @,@ 400 long tons ( 31 @,@ 900 t ) and 32 @,@ 440 long tons ( 32 @,@ 960 t ) , respectively , but they actually displaced 29 @,@ 158 long tons ( 29 @,@ 626 t ) standard and 31 @,@ 917 long tons ( 32 @,@ 429 t ) at full load , over 4 @,@ 000 long tons ( 4 @,@ 060 t ) more than the older ships . The class had a metacentric height of 7 @.@ 82 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) at full load . 
 The ships had four direct drive Parsons steam turbine sets with geared cruising turbines , each of which drove a propeller 12 feet 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) in diameter . They were powered by twelve Babcock & Wilcox water @-@ tube boilers . The turbines were designed to produce a total of 31 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 23 @,@ 500 kW ) , but only achieved 29 @,@ 366 shp ( 21 @,@ 898 kW ) during Pennsylvania 's sea trials , when it slightly exceeded its designed speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . However , Pennsylvania reached 21 @.@ 75 knots ( 40 @.@ 28 km / h ; 25 @.@ 03 mph ) during full @-@ power trials in 1916 , and Arizona reached 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) in September 1924 . The class was designed to normally carry 1 @,@ 548 long tons ( 1 @,@ 573 t ) of fuel oil , but had a maximum capacity of 2 @,@ 305 long tons ( 2 @,@ 342 t ) . At full capacity , they could steam at a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) for an estimated 6 @,@ 070 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 240 km ; 6 @,@ 990 mi ) , though this could be extended to 7 @,@ 585 nautical miles ( 14 @,@ 050 km ; 8 @,@ 730 mi ) with a clean bottom . They had four 300 @-@ kilowatt ( 402 hp ) turbo generators . 
 The Pennsylvania class carried twelve 14 @-@ inch / 45 caliber guns in triple gun turrets . The guns could not elevate independently and were limited to a maximum elevation of + 15 ° which gave them a maximum range of 21 @,@ 000 yards ( 19 @,@ 000 m ) . The ships carried 100 shells for each gun . Defense against torpedo boats was provided by twenty @-@ two 5 @-@ inch / 51 caliber guns mounted in individual casemates in the sides of the hull ; these proved vulnerable to sea spray and could not be worked in heavy seas . At an elevation of 15 ° , they had a maximum range of 14 @,@ 050 yards ( 12 @,@ 850 m ) . Each gun was provided with 230 rounds of ammunition . The ships mounted four 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) / 50 caliber anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns , although only two were fitted when completed . The other pair were added shortly afterward on top of Turret III . The class also mounted two 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes and carried 24 Bliss @-@ Leavitt Mark 3 torpedoes for them . 
 The Pennsylvania @-@ class design continued the all @-@ or @-@ nothing principle of armoring only the most important areas of the battleships , which began in the preceding Nevada class . The waterline armor belt of Krupp armor measured 13 @.@ 5 inches thick and only covered the class ' machinery spaces and magazines . It had a total height of 17 feet 6 inches ( 5 @.@ 3 m ) , of which 8 feet 9 @.@ 75 inches ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) was below the waterline ; beginning 2 feet 4 inches ( 0 @.@ 7 m ) below the waterline , the belt tapered to its minimum thickness of 8 inches . The transverse bulkheads at each end of the ships ranged from 13 to 8 inches in thickness . The faces of the gun turrets were 18 inches ( 457 mm ) thick while the sides were 9 – 10 inches ( 230 – 250 mm ) thick and the turret roofs were protected by 5 inches of armor . The armor of the barbettes was 18 to 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 457 to 114 mm ) thick . The conning tower was protected by 16 inches ( 406 mm ) of armor and had a roof eight inches thick . 
 The main armor deck was three plates thick with a total thickness of 3 inches ; over the steering gear the armor increased to 6 @.@ 25 inches ( 159 mm ) in two plates . Beneath it was the splinter deck that ranged from 1 @.@ 5 to 2 inches ( 38 to 51 mm ) in thickness . The boiler uptakes were protected by a conical mantlet that ranged from 9 to 15 inches ( 230 to 380 mm ) in thickness . A three @-@ inch torpedo bulkhead was placed 9 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 9 m ) inboard from the side , and the class was provided with a complete double bottom . Testing in mid @-@ 1914 revealed that this system could withstand 300 pounds ( 140 kg ) of TNT . 
 = = Authorization and construction = = 
 The authorization for the two Pennsylvania class ships faced political opposition for being too weak and expensive . Senator Benjamin Tillman believed that a much more capable warship was needed because of the shocking increase in battleship size over the previous few years — between 1907 ( the Delaware class ) and 1912 , the displacement of American battleships increased by about fifty percent , from around 20 @,@ 000 long tons ( 20 @,@ 000 t ) to 30 @,@ 000 long tons ( 30 @,@ 000 t ) . Tillman proposed a " maximum battleship " in a Senate resolution in July 1912 , which was adopted unanimously : 
 Resolved : That the Committee on Naval Affairs [ is ] instructed to investigate and report to the Senate ... the object being to find out from official sources the maximum size and maximum draft , the maximum armament , and the maximum armor to make the best battleship or cruiser the world has ever seen or ever will see ; to have this country own the greatest marine engine of war ever constructed or ever to be constructed under known conditions ; and to report whether one such overpowering vessel would not in its judgement be better for this country to build than to continue by increasing taxation to spend the millions and millions of dollars now in prospect in the race for naval supremacy . ... Let us leave some money in the Treasury for other more necessary and useful expenditures , such as good roads , controlling the floods in the Mississippi , draining swamp land in the South , and irrigating the arid land in the West . ( S 361 , 62nd Cong . , 2nd <unk> . ) 
 Tillman 's proposal , however , was treated in his own words as a " joke " ; the Advocate of Peace stated that " it is nearly impossible to read this ... without having an inextinguishable bout of laughter . " Still , C & R completed multiple studies of a maximum battleship constrained only by technological limitations . The first design submitted by C & R was a severely enlarged Nevada , or a 38 @,@ 000 long tons ( 39 @,@ 000 t ) ship with twelve 14 @-@ inch guns , 17 to 9 inches ( 430 to 230 mm ) belt armor , and a maximum speed of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) for a price of $ 19 @.@ 5 million . A later sketch dropped the speed to 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) to see the effect on displacement and cost , which it dropped to 35 @,@ 000 long tons ( 36 @,@ 000 t ) and $ 17 million , respectively , and the consequent shortening of the ship would allow it to enter the dry docks in New York and Norfolk . Tillman was concerned with this speed , however , and another study increased the speed to 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) , trading it for four 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) guns , or one @-@ third of the main battery , and much of the armor . 
 Political opposition in Congress also made it difficult to build the Pennsylvania class . The United States ' House of Representatives refused to fund any new battleships for the fiscal year 1913 , though the Senate would fund two in its comparable bill . They eventually compromised on one , and the battleship that would become Pennsylvania was authorized on 22 August 1912 . The ship 's plans were given to prospective builders on 20 December ; bids were opened on 18 February 1913 ; and the contract was awarded to the lowest bidder , Newport News , on 27 February 1913 at the quoted price of $ 7 @,@ 260 @,@ 000 without armor or armament . The independent bidding process led the navy to claim $ 750 @,@ 000 in savings , but the final cost actually came in at $ 7 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 ( $ 15 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 with armor and armament ) . 
 Arizona was the one approved battleship for the fiscal year 1914 . Secretary of the Navy George von Lengerke Meyer had requested three battleships for that fiscal year , citing the former policy of building two per year , plus an additional ship to make up for authorizing only Pennsylvania in the previous year , but congressional compromises once again approved only one new battleship . Arizona was authorized on 4 March 1913 , but to avoid a lengthy delay between the two , the ship was ordered much more quickly ( on 24 June ) by giving the contract to a navy @-@ owned shipyard . 
 Pennsylvania was laid down on 27 October 1913 , with goals of fourteen months until launch , and <unk> @-@ two until completion . The as @-@ yet unnamed Arizona was laid down on the morning of 16 March 1914 with Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin Delano Roosevelt in attendance , and the builders intended to set a world @-@ record ten months between keel @-@ laying and launch , These ambitious goals — Pennsylvania 's anticipated completion date was a full two months earlier than the American record — were set by Navy Secretary Josephus Daniels , who wanted the United States to compete with British and German building achievements . 
 The constructors were not able not meet these goals , though . Pennsylvania was launched on 16 March 1915 — seventeen months from keel @-@ laying to launch , and just over two @-@ thirds complete — while Arizona was launched on 19 June 1915 , about fifteen months after keel laying . Arizona weighed 12 @,@ 800 long tons ( 13 @,@ 000 t ) at launch . Movie cameras were used to film the launch , in order to provide data for future launches . After their launch , both ships went through the necessary fitting @-@ out period and sea trials . On Pennsylvania 's trials , the ship attained a top speed of 21 @.@ 75 knots ( 40 @.@ 28 km / h ; 25 @.@ 03 mph ) , averaged 21 @.@ 38 knots ( 39 @.@ 60 km / h ; 24 @.@ 60 mph ) , and was also able to steam for twelve hours at 21 @.@ 05 knots ( 38 @.@ 98 km / h ; 24 @.@ 22 mph ) in 50 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 80 km / h ) winds . These attributes pleased the navy 's Board of Inspection , but Scientific American lamented the ship 's low speed compared to the Italian Andrea <unk> , Russian Ganguts , and British Queen Elizabeths , which they ( somewhat inaccurately ) stated had top speeds of 22 @.@ 5 , 23 , and 25 knots , respectively . Pennsylvania was commissioned on 12 June 1916 , its sister ship followed on 17 October 1916 . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service histories = = 
 Pennsylvania and Arizona were commissioned during the First World War , but prior to the United States ' entry on the side of the Allies . During their first year , the ships were cleaned and readied for full active duty . Pennsylvania became the flagship of the US Atlantic Fleet on 12 October 1916 . Arizona first fired its main guns on 23 December , but issues with the propulsion system , specifically a stripped turbine , kept the ship almost exclusively in the New York Navy Yard from December 1916 to March 1917 . Both ships were based in the United States for the duration of the war , owing to a shortage of fuel oil in the United Kingdom , and only the coal @-@ burning battleships of Battleship Division Nine were sent . After the armistice , both Pennsylvania @-@ class battleships were sent to the other side of the Atlantic . Arizona was sent first , leaving on 18 November and arriving in Portsmouth on the 30th . Pennsylvania escorted the American President Woodrow Wilson 's transport , George Washington , across the Atlantic for the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 . In 1921 and 1922 , during the inter @-@ war period , both ships took part in a mission to Peru and were transferred to the Pacific Fleet . 
 Pennsylvania and Arizona were given extensive modernizations from 1929 through 1931 ; the expenditure came in the fiscal year 1930 . As part of the rebuilding , Pennsylvania , which had been designed as a fleet flagship , had its conning tower expanded . Aside from that , Pennsylvania and Arizona received similar treatment : the elevation of the main batteries was increased to 30 ° , new fire control systems on tripod masts were added , the secondary armament and directors were replaced and overhauled , ten 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) anti @-@ aircraft guns ( five per side ) were mounted on the weather deck which was above the secondary anti @-@ ship 5 @-@ inch gun battery , and their bridges were enlarged to hold elevated antiaircraft directors . Armor additions were comparatively minimal beyond anti @-@ torpedo bulges , which were standard additions on all major warships in this period : 1 @.@ 75 to 2 inches ( 44 to 51 mm ) of armor were added to the second armored deck , and a torpedo bulkhead was added to the engine room . The propulsion system of the two Pennsylvanias received perhaps the most attention . The boiler system was entirely replaced with six small @-@ tube boilers and new turbines , the latter partially from the canceled South Dakota @-@ class battleship Washington . The new machinery allowed the ships to come close to their old design speed of 21 knots ( 24 mph ; 39 km / h ) , even with the added bulk of bulges : Pennsylvania made 20 @.@ 89 knots and Arizona 20 @.@ 7 knots on full @-@ power trials . 
 After their modernization , both ships participated in the normal activities of the fleet , including fleet problem exercises , and then joined the entire Pacific Fleet in their new base in Pearl Harbor , Hawaii , after the beginning of the Second World War in Europe . Two years later , on 7 December 1941 , the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor sank Arizona in a tremendous explosion and slightly damaged Pennsylvania , which was in dry dock at the time . 
 Pennsylvania came back into service more quickly than many of the other battleships present during the attack ; it left on 20 December and was under repair in San Francisco until 30 March 1942 . For the next several months , Pennsylvania was stationed on the United States ' West Coast , before being reassigned to Pearl Harbor as the fleet flagship for a short time ( August to October ) . After another refit in San Francisco , which lasted until February 1943 , the ship was sent to assist American forces engaged in the Aleutian Islands Campaign . During this time , Pennsylvania was nearly hit by a torpedo from Japanese submarine I @-@ 31 , which was later sunk . 
 For the next year , Pennsylvania was utilized in shore bombardment in the Battles of Makin , Kwajalein , Eniwetok , and Saipan , along with the Palau Islands Campaign . The ship also participated in the landings on Leyte and the Battle of Leyte Gulf . During this time , Pennsylvania was present at the last battle ever between battleships , the Battle of Surigao Strait . The ship did not fire any salvos because the Japanese vessels were turned away or sunk at long range , beyond Pennsylvania 's outdated fire control but within range of other , radar @-@ directed battleships . 
 In 1945 , Pennsylvania was sent for another refit in San Francisco , and the guns in its main battery , worn out from the frequent shore bombardments , were replaced by those from Nevada and Oklahoma . After its completion in July , the ship bombarded Wake Island on 1 August en route to Okinawa , where it was struck by an air @-@ dropped torpedo . It hit near the starboard propeller shaft , killing twenty men and knocking out three of the ship 's four shafts . The area near the shafts , though , was also a vital area , and the opened seals around the shafts led to large amounts of flooding that nearly sank the battleship . Pennsylvania was towed to shallower waters , where local repairs were made . The ship 's last action was to fire at a kamikaze on 13 August ; it was then towed to Guam beginning on the 18th , where temporary repairs were effected , before being sent to Navy Yard Puget Sound for more permanent repairs . Pennsylvania arrived on 24 October only after a torturous journey , which saw the ship lose all but one of its remaining propeller shafts while taking on water through the temporary patch put over the torpedo hole in Guam . 
 With the Japanese surrender on 2 September , the Puget Sound repairs were limited to those necessary to ensure Pennsylvania 's delivery to Bikini Atoll for atomic experiments in July 1946 . The old battleship survived the tests , but was decommissioned on 29 August and used for radiological studies before being sunk as a target ship on 10 February 1948 . Pennsylvania was struck from the Navy Vessel Register nine days later . 
 = = Images = = 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Southampton Castle = 
 Southampton Castle was located in the town of Southampton in Hampshire , England . Constructed after the Norman conquest of England , it was located in the north @-@ west corner of the town overlooking the River Test , initially as a wooden motte and bailey design . By the late 12th century the royal castle had been largely converted to stone , playing an important part in the wine trade conducted through the Southampton docks . By the end of the 13th century the castle was in decline , but the threat of French raids in the 1370s led Richard II to undertake extensive rebuilding . The result was a powerfully defended castle , one of the first in England to be equipped with cannon . The castle declined again in the 16th century and was sold off to property speculators in 1618 . After being used for various purposes , including the construction of a Gothic mansion in the early 19th century , the site was flattened and largely redeveloped . Only a few elements of the castle still remain visible in Southampton . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 11th – 13th centuries = = = 
 Southampton Castle was first constructed in the late 11th century , at some point after the Norman conquest of England . Southampton at this time was a relatively large town , but not as significant as in the later medieval period . The royal castle was erected within the existing town on the site of a probable large English hall , and considerable damage was caused to the surrounding local buildings as space was opened up for the new fortification . The town of Southampton was protected by water on most sides , surrounded by protective ditches and banks , and the castle was built on rising ground in the north @-@ west corner of the town , overlooking the mouth of the River Test , an important medieval waterway . The initial castle was a timber motte and bailey design , with a motte 45 feet ( 14 metres ) across ; at least some of the bailey walls were rebuilt in stone during the first half of the 12th century . The wealthiest parts of Southampton were in the west of the town , just to the south of the castle , with some of the poorest districts just beyond the castle to the north @-@ east . The castle was positioned so as to adjoin the town 's quays . 
 During the years of the Anarchy , in which the Empress Matilda and Stephen fought for control of England , the castle was held by William le Gros , the bishop of Winchester and supporter of Stephen . When Henry II came to the throne in 1153 , he took back the castle and took steps to improve the condition of Southampton castle , as part of his attempt to improve the general standard of security in the south . At this time , Southampton was considered a key fortification , classed alongside other important castles such as the Tower of London , Windsor , Oxford , Lincoln and Winchester . 
 By the second half of the 12th century , Southampton Castle was valued more for its role in coastal defence and as a coastal base for operations on the continent than for its value in ensuring internal security . Following the threat of French invasion in the 1170s , Henry II invested modest additional resources in the castle , and in 1187 the wooden keep was converted into a stone shell @-@ keep . John increased spending on the castle during his reign . Royal visits to Southampton were quite common , and additional royal accommodation , called the King 's House , was built outside the castle . 
 Southampton was an important trading port in the 12th century , with trade routes to Normandy , the Levant and Gascony . The castle played an important role in this trade , in part forming a warehouse for the king 's imports , this process being managed by a Crown Bailiff . Royal purchases of wine were particularly important for the castle , being stored and distributed to royal properties across the south of England . The former castle hall was turned into a subterranean vault in the 13th century , probably for storing wine . 
 = = = 14th – 15th centuries = = = 
 By 1300 , Southampton was a major port and a large provincial town , with a population of around 5 @,@ 000 . In 1338 there was a successful French attack on Southampton , burning various buildings down and damaging the castle . Edward III responded by improving the quality of the town defences , including building walls along the old ditch and bank defences , and particularly focusing on improving the west side of the town , but little work appears to have been done to improve the castle itself . By the middle of the 14th century , Southampton Castle sat alongside one and a quarter miles ( 2 km ) of town walls , although the castle and the walls were kept administratively separate . 
 In 1370 the French made a successful attack on Portsmouth , commencing a new sequence of raids along the English coast . In due course first Edward , then Richard , responded with a new building programme of castles , including work at Southampton , where the castle was in a poor condition , owing in part to the theft of building materials , including stone and lead , by the citizens of the town . Henry Yevele and architect William Wynford rebuilt the keep from 1378 to 1382 , whilst additional defences were added between 1383 and 1388 , including a barbican and a protective mantlet wall . Thomas <unk> was appointed to the castle as the chaplain , being paid an unusually high wage of £ 10 a year , reflecting his other skills as a military engineer . Southampton Castle was equipped with its first cannon in 1382 , making it one of the first castles in the country to be so equipped . At this time cannon were still unreliable , only capable of reaching relatively short ranges and required the construction of specialist gunports ; once again , the decision was driven by the fears of French attack . An " expert in guns and the management of artillery " was retained during the 15th century to manage the new weaponry . 
 After the scare of 1457 , when French troops successfully attacked the town of Sandwich on the south coast , Southampton Castle was once again put on alert , and one of Henry VI 's more " dependable captains " , Nicholas Carew , was given control of the castle for life . Despite investment in the castle declining , the antiquarian John Leland could describe the new keep in the early 16th century as being " the glory of the castle , both large and fair and very strong , both by works and by the site of it " . 
 = = = 16th – 19th centuries = = = 
 The castle began a second period of decline in the 16th century . After 1518 , no more money was spent repairing the castle . The inner bailey became used first as a rubbish tip , then for small @-@ scale agriculture . By 1585 , the castle was " very <unk> and in <unk> decaye " . In contrast to many royal castles , Southampton Castle was never converted into a gaol , with Southampton 's two prisons instead being built in the town at the Bargate and on Fish Street . In 1618 James I sold the castle to property speculators ; it was then sold on to George Gollop , a local merchant , and a windmill was subsequently built on the motte . The castle played no role in the subsequent English Civil War , although some of the masonry was used to strengthen the town walls in 1650 . Two of the entrances to the castle , Southgate and Castle Eastgate , were demolished in the late 18th century ; and the remaining castle buildings fell into significant disrepair . 
 Several short @-@ lived buildings were later constructed on top of the motte . The first of these around the turn of the 19th century was a banqueting house constructed by Lord Stafford . In 1808 Marquess of Landsdowne built a mansion in a Gothic style on top of the motte using some of the stone remains of the old keep ; it became known as Landsdowne Castle , providing famous views across the town . Landsdowne Castle was pulled down in either 1815 or 1818 , and most of the motte was subsequently flattened . 
 From the late 19th century onwards the castle site was subject to considerable development . A new road – Upper Bugle Street – was built through the old bailey site , and various local council buildings constructed . Development continued after the Second World War , in which large parts of the city around the castle were significantly damaged by bombing . 
 = = Today = = 
 Only fragments of the medieval castle survive today , with most of the original site covered by modern buildings and dominated by the block of flats built in 1962 over the remaining part of the castle motte . The castle hall and the castle vaults can still be seen , along with surviving parts of the south bailey wall , the Castle Watergate and fragments of the north wall . A sequence of archaeological investigations between 1973 and 1983 excavated around 10 % of the total castle area , and more limited work has occurred since , including a " watching brief " excavation carried out in Forest View road in 2001 . 
 = Guyana at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 Guyana sent a team to compete at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China . Four representatives of Guyana qualified to take part in the Beijing Games – Adam Harris , Marian Burnett , and <unk> Pompey in track , and Niall Roberts in swimming – and Pompey advanced past the first round in her event , progressing to semifinals . Meanwhile , Alika Morgan ( track & field ) and <unk> Williams ( cycling ) took part in the Games ’ Youth Olympics camp , held in Beijing at the same time as the Olympics . Along with coaches and administrative members , Guyana sent a total of ten people to Beijing . The appearance of Guyana 's delegation in Beijing marked the fifteenth Guyanese Olympic delegation to appear at an Olympic games , which started with their participation as British Guiana in the 1948 Summer Olympics . There were no medalists from Guyana at the Beijing Olympics . Roberts was Guyana 's flagbearer at the ceremonies in Beijing . 
 = = Background = = 
 Guyana is a former British colony that extends from the northern coast of South America . It is adjacent to Venezuela , Brazil , and Suriname , and is within the vicinity of the island nation of Trinidad and Tobago . Athletes from Guyanese delegations have appeared at the Olympics since the 1948 Summer Olympics in London , and have participated at every Summer Olympic games between 1948 and 2008 except for the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montréal . Guyana declared independence from the British Empire in 1966 , and participated in all previous games ( from 1948 to 1964 ) under its colonial name , British Guiana . Overall , Guyana 's appearance in Beijing marked its fifteenth Olympic appearance . The country has not sent delegations to participate in any Winter Games . 
 In all of its history , the only case in which a Guyanese athlete has medaled at the Olympics was when Michael Anthony won a bronze medal at the 1980 Summer Olympics in the Soviet Union . The size of Guyana 's delegation peaked at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles when it sent ten athletes , but ( as of Beijing ) had never risen past seven athletes other than in the 1980s . In Beijing , swimmer Niall Roberts bore Guyana 's flag at the ceremonies . 
 A total of ten people constituted the Guyanese delegation to Beijing : the four Olympic athletes , two Youth Olympic athletes ( sprinter Alika Morgan and cyclist <unk> Williams ) , chef @-@ de @-@ mission Noel Adonis , swimming coach Stephanie Fraser , track and field team manager Cornel Rose , and track and field coach Joseph Ryan . Six of the delegation 's members were based in Guyana and departed from their nation on 2 August 2008 for Beijing . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 = = = Men 's competition = = = 
 = = = = Men 's 200 meters = = = = 
 Adam Harris , who was 21 at the time of the Beijing Olympics , was the sole male track athlete participating on Guyana 's behalf in 2008 . Born in the Chicago area , Harris previously participated as an athlete at the University of Michigan . In Beijing , Adam Harris participated in the men 's 200 meters dash , marking the first time he ever participated in any Olympic event . Harris participated in the first heat during the 17 August qualification round of his event , and finished the race in sixth place at 21 @.@ 36 seconds . Harris placed ahead of Jordan 's Khalil Al <unk> ( 21 @.@ 55 seconds ) and behind Botswana 's <unk> <unk> ( 21 @.@ 09 seconds ) . The leaders of Harris ' heat included the United States ' Shawn Crawford ( 20 @.@ 61 seconds ) and Poland 's Marcin <unk> ( 20 @.@ 64 seconds ) . Out of the 62 finishing athletes , Harris ranked 50th . He did not advance to later rounds . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 = = = Women 's competition = = = 
 = = = = Women 's 800 meters = = = = 
 Marian Burnett participated on Guyana 's behalf in the women 's 800 meters race at the Beijing Olympics . Born in Linden , Burnett has been affiliated with the athletics program at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge . His appearance at Beijing marked her second after her appearance in the same event at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens , where she also represented Guyana . During the 14 August qualification round , Burnett was placed in the second heat . She completed the race in 2 : 02 @.@ 02 , placing fifth in a heat of seven people . Burnett placed ahead of the United States ' Alice Schmidt ( 2 : 02 @.@ 33 ) and behind Belarus ' <unk> <unk> ( 2 : 00 @.@ 42 ) in a heat led by the Ukraine 's Yuliya <unk> ( 2 : 00 @.@ 21 ) and Russia 's Tatiana <unk> ( 2 : 00 @.@ 31 ) . Out of the 40 finishing athletes , Burnett placed 23rd . She did not advance to later rounds . 
 = = = = Women 's 400 meters = = = = 
 Manhattan College @-@ affiliated athlete <unk> Pompey , ( or <unk> Pompey ) a runner who was born in the capital city of Georgetown and has trained with the Shore Aquatics Club in New Jersey , represented Guyana at the Beijing Olympics in the women 's 400 meters race . Pompey had run this race for Guyana both in Athens and during the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney and had advanced past the first round each time . During the 16 August qualification round , Pompey competed in the fifth heat and finished the race in 50 @.@ 99 seconds , placing second behind the United States ' Sanya Richards ( 50 @.@ 43 seconds ) and ahead of Nigeria 's <unk> <unk> ( 51 @.@ 45 seconds ) . Out of the 50 participating athletes , Pompey ranked sixth . She advanced to the semifinal round . 
 At semifinals , which took place on 17 August , Pompey was placed in the first heat . She finished the race in 50 @.@ 93 seconds and placed fourth out of the eight athletes in the heat , ahead of the United States ' Mary Wineberg ( 51 @.@ 13 seconds ) but behind Russia 's Tatiana <unk> ( 50 @.@ 31 seconds ) . The leaders of Pompey 's semifinal heat were Great Britain 's Christine <unk> ( 50 @.@ 14 seconds ) and Jamaica 's <unk> Williams ( 50 @.@ 28 seconds ) . Out of the 24 athletes who advanced to the semifinal round , Pompey ranked 11th . She did not advance to the final round . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 = = Swimming = = 
 Then 17 @-@ year @-@ old Niall Roberts , who was born in the capital city of Georgetown , participated as the only swimmer representing Guyana in the Beijing Olympics . Roberts participated in the men 's 50 meter freestyle , and had not previously participated in any Olympic games . During the 14 August preliminary round , Roberts swam in the sixth heat of his event and completed his race in 25 @.@ 13 seconds . Roberts placed seventh , placing ahead of Mohamed <unk> of the Comoros ( 29 @.@ 63 seconds ) and behind Mozambique 's <unk> <unk> ( 24 @.@ 93 seconds ) . The leaders of Roberts ' heat were Nigeria 's Yellow Yei Yah ( 24 @.@ 00 seconds ) and the Netherlands Antilles ' Rodion Davelaar ( 24 @.@ 21 seconds ) . Out of the 97 athletes who participated in the preliminary round , Roberts ranked 69th . He did not advance to later rounds . 
 Men 
 = Baths of Zeuxippus = 
 The Baths of Zeuxippus were popular public baths in the city of Constantinople , the capital of the Byzantine Empire . They were built between 100 to 200 , destroyed by the Nika revolt of 532 and then rebuilt several years later . They were so called because they were built upon the site where a Temple of Jupiter ( Zeus ) had formerly existed . They were built around 500 yards south of the much older baths of Achilles of the earlier Greek Acropolis in Byzantion . The baths were famed primarily for the many statues that were built within , and the famous people they each represented . However , they were later used for military purposes , during the seventh century . Excavations of the site and the Baths were made in 1928 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The original baths , which were founded and built by Septimius Severus , and decorated under Constantine I were adorned with numerous mosaics and over eighty statues , mostly those of historical figures , with Homer , Hesiod , Plato , Aristotle , Julius Caesar , Demosthenes , Aeschines and Virgil all among them , as well as the figures of gods and mythological heroes ; . These statues were taken from various places worldwide , including regions such as Asia and the surrounding areas , Rome , Greece and Asia Minor . The Baths did , indeed , follow a trend of architecture during the period ; places such as the Palace of the Senate , that of the Forums , the Palace of <unk> were all adorned with similar statues , of heroes ( mythological and not ) , historical figures , and powerful people , becoming part of a contemporary form of artful architecture . 
 For a relatively small fee , entrance could be gained by any member of the general public to the Bath complex . While the area was obviously primarily used for public bathing , one could exercise and enjoy a variety of recreational activities . Attendants were paid to oversee these activities , and the happenings of the complex , enforcing opening and closing times , and the rules of conduct . Men and women were not allowed to bathe together ; they would either be in separate baths , or bathe at different times of the day . 
 The popularity of the Baths of Zeuxippus was very great among the citizens , despite the numerous number of baths that had been available for public access at the time in Constantinople , and therefore , the great competition that existed in that commercial area . Even the likes of clergy and monks were seen there , despite the insistence by their superiors that the baths were places of impious behaviour . 
 = = Location = = 
 The 12th century scholar Zonaras tells of how Severus connected the baths to the Hippodrome and , in doing so , built it on the site of the Temple of Jupiter . However , Leontius , who was more accurate in his writings ( which also predate those of Zonaras ) , instead asserted that the baths were not actually joined to the Hippodrome , but was simply close to it : 
 Between Zeuxippus ' cool refreshing baths , 
 And the famed Hippodrome 's swift course I stand . 
 Let the spectator , where he bathes himself 
 Or sees the struggling steed panting for breath 
 Pay a kind visit , to enhance his pleasures ; 
 He 'll find a hearty welcome at my table . 
 Or if more manly sports his mind affects , 
 Practice the rough diversions of the stadia . 
 In addition to this , the Baths of Zeuxippus were also close ( most probably adjacent ) to the Great Palace grounds . This evidences their popularity , as such a location would have attracted many people , being in such great proximity to such significant places . The square of the <unk> and the basilica of Hagia Sophia were also close to the Baths . 
 The map to the right shows the Baths ' approximate location within Constantinople , as determined by excavations made there . As can be seen , the Baths were roughly quadrangular in shape , and were , indeed , very close to , or even " connected " to the Palace , as Zonaras indicated . 
 = = Destruction and later use = = 
 As a result of the Nika revolt of 532 , which constituted the worst uprising Constantinople had seen at the time , and which left half of the city in ruins and thousands of people dead , the original Baths of Zeuxippus were destroyed in blazing fire . While Justinian took action to rebuild the Baths , he could not recreate or restore the statues or the antiquities that were lost in 532 . 
 Soon after this however , in the early 7th century , as a result of extreme military and political pressure on the Byzantine Empire , public bathing changed from being a common luxury to a rare and infrequent one , and many public facilities and venues began to be used for the austere purposes of the military . They are last attested as being used as baths in 713 , before being converted to other uses : part of the building became the prison known as <unk> , while another part appears to have been used as a silk workshop . 
 Almost 1 @,@ 000 years later , in 1556 , the Ottoman architect Mimar Sinan built the Haseki Hürrem Sultan <unk> on the same grounds . Later still , in 1927 @-@ 1928 , excavations were made at the site , and many historical relics were recovered , such as earthenware and glazed pottery , giving unique insights into the architectural designs and social interests of the people and culture of Constantinople at the time . 
 Most particular of the objects found at the site were two statues which were inscribed with the words <unk> and <unk> [ sic ] on their bases , giving rise to the theory that tells of how Christodorus of Coptus effectively wrote the six epigrams on the many statues of the Baths , and lending further plausibility to the writings of both Zonaras and Leontius . 
 = = Inspired Literature = = 
 Christodorus of Coptus , an Egyptian poet and writer wrote a lengthy ( 416 lines long ) hexameter piece of poetry inspired by the glory of the statues housed within the halls of the Baths of Zeuxippus . This poem actually consisted of a number of short epigrams ( six in total ) , each focusing on one or a small group of statues within the Baths , designed to combine to form one work . While it has been suggested that the epigrams of Christodorus of Coptus may actually have been inscribed on the ( bases ) of the statues themselves , this is unlikely because of his use of the <unk> medium , and the presence of the past tense in the text . 
 = MediEvil = 
 MediEvil is an action @-@ adventure hack and slash video game developed by SCE Cambridge Studio and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation . It was first released in Europe and North America on 1 October 1998 and in Japan on 17 June 1999 . It was followed by a sequel , MediEvil 2 , released in 2000 , and a PlayStation Portable remake released in 2005 titled MediEvil : Resurrection . It was also re @-@ released on the PlayStation Network in 2007 . The game is set in the medieval Kingdom of Gallowmere and centres around the charlatan protagonist , Sir Daniel Fortesque , as he makes an attempt to stop antagonist Zarok 's invasion of the kingdom whilst simultaneously redeeming himself . 
 Development began in 1995 at Millenium Interactive in Cambridge under the working title of " Dead Man Dan " . The game 's visuals are heavily influenced by Tim Burton 's The Nightmare Before Christmas . Originally conceived as an arcade @-@ style shooter for platforms such as Windows and the Sega Saturn , Sony 's purchase of SCE Cambridge Studio evolved the game into a PlayStation title . The game received mostly positive praise from critics upon release , with praise including its blend of Hallowe 'en themed visuals but was criticised for its controls and cumbersome camera work . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game takes place across a variety of levels , many of which require certain objectives to be performed to progress . Sir Daniel Fortesque can use a variety of weapons , consisting of close range weapons such as swords and clubs to long range weapons such as crossbows . Many of these weapons can be charged for a powerful attack and some weapons , such as the club , can be used to access areas that are otherwise inaccessible . When not possessing any items , Dan is able to rip his own arm off and use it for both melee and ranged attacks . Dan can equip a shield alongside weapons to defend against attacks ; though they can only take several hits of damage before breaking . Throughout the game , Dan can visit gargoyle heads of two varieties ; green ones offer Dan information while blue ones allow Dan to buy services or ammunition by using the treasures he finds . 
 Dan 's health is determined by a single health bar , which reduces when Dan is hit . It will deplete completely if Dan drowns or falls from a great height . If Dan completely runs out of health , the game will end . Dan can extend his maximum health by collecting Life Bottles , which will automatically refill his health bar if it drops to zero . Also hidden throughout the game are Life <unk> and Life Fountains that can replenish Dan 's health and fill up any empty Life Bottles Dan has . In each level , there is a hidden Chalice of Souls , which can be collected if the player fills it with enough souls from defeated enemies ( some Chalices are awarded via other means ) . If the player clears a level with a Chalice in hand , Dan is warped to the Hall of Heroes , where he can speak to a legendary hero who will give him rewards , such as weapons . If the player finishes the game with all the Chalices , the game 's true ending is revealed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the year 1286 , an evil sorcerer named Zarok plotted to take over the kingdom of Gallowmere with his undead army . It is told in legend that the King of Gallowmere 's champion , Sir Daniel Fortesque , led his army to victory and managed to kill Zarok before succumbing to his mortal wounds . In reality however , Dan was in fact struck down by the first arrow fired in the battle , with the king choosing to cover it up and declare Dan the " Hero of Gallowmere " . Zarok , meanwhile , was forced into hiding and was presumed dead . 100 years later , in 1386 , Zarok reappears , casting a spell over Gallowmere to awaken his undead army and steal the souls of the living . However , in the process , he unwittingly revives the corpse of Dan , who has over time become a skeletal corpse , missing his jaw and the eye he lost in the battle of Gallowmere . Having been unable to ascend to the Hall of Heroes due to his failures in life , Dan uses this opportunity to defeat Zarok , save Gallowmere and earn his place as a true hero . 
 As Dan travels across Gallowmere , fighting his way through Zarok 's hordes and confronting all manners of beasts , he soon arrives at Zarok 's lair , fighting off Zarok 's skeletal warriors using the souls of his old allies retrieved by collecting the Chalices . After also managing to defeat Zarok 's champion , Lord <unk> , Zarok turns into a powerful monster , but Dan manages to defeat him . As Zarok uses his last breath to cause his lair to collapse , Dan escapes and Zarok 's magical influence over the land is thwarted , restoring the souls back to the living and putting the dead back to rest . With the magic cast on him also wearing off as a result , Dan returns to his burial chamber where he once again enters eternal slumber . If the player has managed to collect all the Chalices , Dan will ascend to the Hall of Heroes , where is hailed as the rightful Hero of Gallowmere . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development of MediEvil begun in 1995 at independent developer Millennium Interactive in Cambridge . Chris Sorrell , previously known for the James Pond series of games , created the original concept for MediEvil and served as the game 's creative director . 
 According to Sorrell , the first design proposal for the game had the working title ‘ Dead Man Dan ’ and described a game that was initially a fusion of Capcom 's Ghost 'n Goblins combined with the art style of Tim Burton 's The Nightmare Before Christmas . As development progressed , lead artist Jason Wilson pushed the game into more of a Zelda role playing game @-@ influenced direction as opposed to the original arcade @-@ style concept . Looking to attract a major publishing deal , Millennium Interactive initially began working on multiple platforms including Windows and the Sega Saturn before giving Sony of Europe a working demo of the game . Impressed by the progress , Sony signed MediEvil to be an exclusive PlayStation game and commissioned SCE Cambridge Studio as Sony 's second studio in the United Kingdom , after Psygnosis . 
 SCE Cambridge wanted the game to possess a unique lead character , thus Sorrell worked with script doctor Martin Pond whilst creating an expansive backstory for the lead protagonist , Sir Daniel Fortesque . Pond came up with the idea that Sir Daniel could have been a pompous failure in life whose reincarnation was his one shot at redemption . This idea , along with the player @-@ character 's unusual appearance , turned appealing to some sectors of the gaming community , as lead designer Jason Wilson later recalled that female gamers considered Sir Daniel to be endearing , and was considered a sex symbol in France . 
 Sony 's acquisition of SCE Cambridge helped ease financial strain on the project , but did not assist the studio 's inexperience with making 3D games . Sorrell admitted in a retrospective interview that MediEvil presented " a mountain of challenges " due to the fact that , like many other developers at the time , were new to 3D gaming . He also admitted that some members of the team spent long nights without sleeping in order to finish the game on time . During development , the Cambridge team played beta versions of successful platformers such as Super Mario 64 and Crash Bandicoot which helped them understand how they might solve some challenges in building a 3D action game for the first time . 
 Sony requested that MediEvil should support the ( then ) new PlayStation analogue controller , which Sorrell described as a " particularly fortuitous event " as it allowed them to capture much more fluidity and intuitiveness within the game . New concepts such as camera and character control presented many drawbacks and required the team to try out a number of approaches before settling on solutions that seemed to work . The team finally settled on the concept that MediEvil would support both analogue and digital camera @-@ related controls for balance reasons . There were also many levels and ideas from the original concept that the team were forced to remove due to time or budget constraints . There was intended to be a platform @-@ oriented section of the game where the player would control the worm that lived in Daniel 's skull . Concept art and a separate level was created for this section , but it never materialised into the game . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The original soundtrack of the game was composed by Paul Arnold and Andrew Barnabas , the musical duo more commonly known as " Bob & Barn " . SCE Cambridge instructed them to compose a Danny Elfman @-@ influenced score , similar to those of Beetlejuice , The Nightmare Before Christmas and Batman Returns . The music was created using electronic synthesizers to simulate an entire orchestra and organ . The 2005 PlayStation Portable re @-@ imagining MediEvil : Resurrection used parts of the MediEvil score , along with original elements composed by Bob & Barn that was performed by a live orchestra and choir . An album was made from this music and signed copies can be purchased from the artists ' website . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received positive reviews from critics upon release , later being re @-@ released as a PlayStation Platinum title . It received an aggregate score of 80 % from GameRankings and was mostly praised for its Halloween @-@ influenced atmosphere by many critics . IGN 's Chris Roper praised the game 's sense of humour and unique presentation , but was skeptical concerning the game 's " sloppy " controls , disjointed level designs and noted that the game 's graphics did not age well overtime considering the PSP remake which offered superior graphics and gameplay . Despite this , Roper heralded it as " a fun game and one of PlayStation 's classics " . Game Revolution similarly praised the humour but criticised the game for being too straightforward and " easy to master " , noting that the graphics and gameplay were slightly inferior to that of Banjo @-@ Kazooie . 
 The music and atmosphere were the mostly praised aspects of the game . Many reviewers compared the visuals to be similar to Tim Burton 's The Nightmare Before Christmas . Joe Fielder of GameSpot credited MediEvil for its original look and number of unique puzzles , but criticised the camera work , summarising that a " tighter camera control " would have been a necessity . Randy Nelson of IGN considered the game to be a homage to Capcom 's Ghosts & Goblins , stating that the game took too many inspirations from others and not enough innovation was put into it to make it " unique " . Nelson praised the environment of the game but considered the gameplay to be best suited for " a mindless <unk> ' n @-@ slash romp " . 
 = Saturday Night ( Natalia Kills song ) = 
 " Saturday Night " is a song recorded by English singer @-@ songwriter Natalia Kills for her second studio album , Trouble ( 2013 ) . It was exclusively released to online media retailers as the album 's second single on 28 June 2013 , following the release of the promotional single " Controversy " and the album 's lead single " Problem " . Written by American record producer Jeff Bhasker and Kills , the song faces the themes of " squandered youth and disenchantment " , and talks about moving on while going through a difficult time . Musically , it is a new wave @-@ tinged , synth @-@ based song . 
 Upon its release , critical response to " Saturday Night " was generally positive : contemporary music critics highlighted the lyrics ' personal content and billed it as Kills ' best song to date . " Saturday Night " was able to peak at number twenty @-@ three at the singles chart of New Zealand , and reached the top 10 of the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs . Along with the single release , a music video directed by Guillaume Doubet was released in July 2013 . It revolves around domestic abuse , drug addiction , and Kills ' relationship with her parents . 
 = = Background = = 
 Kills revealed to Elle that the songwriting process for " Saturday Night " was difficult , as she had to confront memories and feelings . She further explained that , to her , it felt like a " confession " . This song was deemed by Kills as her life 's soundtrack : " When I was almost 14 , I left home , got a job , and thought I was going to be a big TV star . I was determined to prove myself . I kept telling myself , ' I 'm going to be fine , ' even when I wasn 't — especially when I didn 't even believe it . The song is about carrying on , even though you feel like you can 't . It 's about feeling OK when everything is not . " She later reiterated those sentiments with website Digital Spy , and stated that it would show people what she truly was and what she had gone through over the years . 
 = = Composition = = 
 At a length of 4 minutes and 46 seconds ( 4 : 46 ) , " Saturday Night " is a mid tempo synth @-@ driven song , styled in the genres of pop and new wave , and is backed up by a " propulsive " synth line . Its instrumentation incorporates guitar twangs which are resemblant to those present in Nancy Sinatra 's catalog ; keyboards and a drumbeat . The autobiographical lyrics depict growing up in a home where domestic violence occurs , while also discussing " poignancy and lived experience " . The song 's " arena @-@ ready , fists @-@ aloft " chorus sees Kills singing " ' Cause it 's just another Saturday night " , with repetitive " whoas " . 
 Critics have likened it to the works of the band Fun ( whom collaborated with Bhasker on their Grammy @-@ nominated album , Some Nights ) , the electronic music duo The Knife , and the Canadian band <unk> . Some have compared Kills ' vocal performance ( and respective production ) to that of American recording artist Lana Del Rey . Allison from MuchMusic noted a contrast between its " serious subject matter " with an " uptempo , 80s synth beat " , which according to the editor , creates a " visceral listening experience " . Bradley Stern from MuuMuse wrote that the song 's production was reminiscent of typical Ryan Tedder @-@ produced songs . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Saturday Night " was released on 28 June 2013 as Trouble 's official second single : clean and explicit versions were released simultaneously before they were placed under its album 's page . It was also serviced to Swedish pop radio stations . More than four months later , a remix EP for the song was released , containing two already known remixes by Gregori <unk> and Lovelife and two new remixes by Samantha Ronson vs. DK , and by Yeasayer . Another remix was produced by <unk> and released , but not included in the extended play . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The song received universal acclaim from critics upon release , with many deeming it as her strongest single to date . Sam Lansky from Idolator praised the song 's lyrics and classified it as the best of the singer 's career . Jacques from <unk> also praised the lyrics and described the song as " tight and radio @-@ friendly " . Matt Collar from Allmusic felt " Saturday Night " was one of the album 's standout tracks . On the week of 16 September 2013 , " Saturday Night " entered at number 34 on the New Zealand Singles Chart , and has since peaked at number 23 . On the week of 14 October 2013 , " Saturday Night " dropped to number 30 . It reentered at number 33 on the week of 11 November 2013 . 
 The song entered the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs at number 42 , moving to numbers 37 and 24 in the following week , and ultimately peaking at 6 . In Sweden , the top 10 of downloads listed " Saturday Night " at number 7 , having the same position at the top 10 of streams . The song has proven to be popular on Internet blogs and media outlets , peaking at the top of the popular chart at The Hype Machine . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A music video for " Saturday Night " , directed by Guillaume Doubet , was shot in May 2013 , and was released onto Kills ' Vevo official account on 10 July 2013 . Additional behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage for the music video was released on 31 July 2013 onto YouTube . 
 It primarily depicts the " troubled " relationship between the singer and her parents . The singer revealed to Life + Times how she translated the message of the song into a music video : " I wanted to make a song and a video that showed how fucked up youth can be ; having no control , money or guidance . " Furthermore , she deemed the video " literal " , confirming that the actors look " just like [ her ] real family " and that the set designer built the set from photos of the house she grew up in . During an interview with Playboy , Kills described the shooting of the video as " exciting " and revealed that she sent out pictures of what her real parents looked like and chose the actors that would play them in the video . 
 The video starts with her fictional mother applying blush over a bruised eye . As the music video continues , Kills repeatedly reenters the set with her parents as their relationship starts to " spiral " . The video ends with a Christmas home movie of Kills ' family . Various suggestions of domestic abuse , illegal business , problems with the law and drug addiction are presented throughout the video . Bradley Stern from MuuMuse thought the music video was a metaphor for Kills ' personal life , commenting : " As much as she escapes the room , she always winds up walking back inside . She never really can escape her past . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Saturday Night " – 4 : 46 
 Digital download – Remixes EP 
 " Saturday Night " ( Yeasayer ) – 4 : 16 
 " Saturday Night " ( Samantha Ronson vs. DK Remix ) – 3 : 58 
 " Saturday Night " ( Gregori <unk> ) – 4 : 51 
 " Saturday Night " ( Lovelife Remix ) – 4 : 29 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording places 
 Recorded at Enormous Studios and Record Plant . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Trouble , Interscope Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Cy Seymour = 
 James Bentley " Cy " Seymour ( December 9 , 1872 – September 20 , 1919 ) was an American center fielder and pitcher in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . From 1896 through 1913 , Seymour played for the New York Giants ( 1896 – 1900 , 1906 – 1910 ) , Baltimore Orioles ( 1901 – 1902 ) , Cincinnati Reds ( 1902 – 1906 ) and Boston Braves ( 1913 ) . He batted and threw left @-@ handed . 
 Primarily a center fielder , Seymour retired with 1 @,@ 724 hits and a lifetime batting average of .303 . He was a pitcher for his first five seasons , ending his MLB career with a 61 – 56 win – loss record and a 3 @.@ 76 earned run average in 140 games pitched ( 123 as a starting pitcher ) . Only Babe Ruth retired with more combined wins and hits . Seymour is the Reds ' career leader in batting average ( .332 ) and holds the Reds ' single @-@ season record for batting average ( .377 in 1905 ) . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Seymour played semi @-@ professional baseball in Plattsburgh , New York , receiving a monthly salary of $ 1 @,@ 000 ( $ 28 @,@ 444 in current dollar terms ) . He began his professional career in minor league baseball with Springfield Ponies of the Class @-@ A Eastern League and New York Metropolitans of the Class @-@ A Atlantic League in 1896 . 
 = = = Major League Baseball = = = 
 = = = = New York Giants ( 1896 – 1900 ) = = = = 
 Seymour signed with the New York Giants of the National League ( NL ) during the 1896 season , making his Major League Baseball ( MLB ) debut on April 22 . A sometimes wild pitcher , The New York Times described him as having a " $ 10 @,@ 000 arm and a $ 00 @,@ 000 head " . Seymour set a MLB record with three errors in one inning , a record later tied by Tommy John . However , he pitched to an 18 – 14 win – loss record in 1897 , with a 3 @.@ 37 earned run average ( ERA ) , while recording 149 strikeouts , good for second in the NL . 
 In 1898 , he won 25 games , had a 3 @.@ 18 ERA , and led the NL in strikeouts with 239 , while leading the team in wins and games started ( 43 ) . During the season , Seymour pitched three games in two days against the Baltimore Orioles . Orioles manager John McGraw later said that Seymour deserved the title of " Iron Man " more than Joe McGinnity . 
 Seymour held out from the Giants for the first month of the 1899 season in a contract dispute , eventually signing for $ 2 @,@ 000 ( $ 56 @,@ 888 in current dollar terms ) , a $ 500 raise ( $ 14 @,@ 222 in current dollar terms ) over his 1898 salary . He finished second in the NL in strikeouts with 142 . Seymour was briefly demoted to the minor leagues after walking 11 batters in a victory against the St. Louis Perfectos on June 7 , 1900 . Due to injuries and the ineffectiveness of the Giants ' outfielders , the team began to play Seymour in the outfield , though they insisted that Seymour would not shift positions on a permanent basis . Seymour last pitched for the Giants that season , at which point he converted into an outfielder full @-@ time due to injury from throwing the screwball . 
 = = = = Baltimore Orioles ( 1901 – 1902 ) = = = = 
 With the formation of the American League ( AL ) as a competitor to the NL , Seymour joined many fellow NL players who jumped to the AL . McGraw , remembering Seymour 's toughness in previous seasons , signed Seymour to his team , the Baltimore Orioles , before the 1901 season . Seymour batted .303 with the Orioles that year . By 1902 , the franchise began to fall into significant debt . Joe Kelley , star player for the Orioles and son @-@ in @-@ law of part @-@ owner John Mahon , reported that the team owed as much as $ 12 @,@ 000 ( $ 328 @,@ 200 in current dollar terms ) . Unable to afford that debt , Mahon purchased shares of the team from Kelley and player @-@ manager McGraw , who had resigned from the team and signed with the Giants . With this , Mahon became the majority shareholder . On July 17 , 1902 , Mahon sold his interest in the Orioles to Andrew Freedman , principal owner of the Giants , and John T. Brush , principal owner of the Cincinnati Reds , also of the NL . That day , Freedman and Brush released Seymour , McGraw , Kelley , McGinnity , Roger Bresnahan , Jack Cronin , and Dan McGann from their Oriole contracts . Brush then signed Seymour and Kelley to the Reds , while Freedman signed McGinnity , Bresnahan , Cronin , and McGann , joining McGraw , his new player @-@ manager , on the Giants . 
 = = = = Cincinnati Reds ( 1902 – 1906 ) = = = = 
 Reds owner Garry Herrmann added $ 100 per month ( $ 2 @,@ 735 in current dollar terms ) to Seymour 's $ 2 @,@ 800 annual salary ( $ 76 @,@ 580 in current dollar terms ) when he acquired him from Baltimore , and made him the team 's starting center fielder . He set a record with four sacrifice bunts in one game on July 25 , 1902 ; this mark was tied by Jake Daubert on August 15 , 1914 . Seymour continued to bat above .300 with the Reds in each season through 1905 , when he led the NL in batting average ( .377 ) , hits ( 219 ) , runs batted in ( RBI ) ( 121 ) , doubles ( 40 ) , triples ( 21 ) , and slugging percentage ( .559 ) . He would have won the Triple Crown but he finished second in home runs with eight , behind Fred <unk> 's nine . His .377 batting average set the single @-@ season record for the Reds , and his 325 total bases that season were an NL record through 1919 . Seymour had a .333 batting average during his tenure with the Reds , which remains a franchise record . 
 = = = = New York Giants ( 1906 – 1910 ) = = = = 
 The Giants purchased Seymour from the Reds on July 12 , 1906 for $ 10 @,@ 000 ( $ 263 @,@ 370 in current dollar terms ) , the largest monetary transaction in baseball to date . Seymour attempted to hold out from the Giants in order to obtain a portion of this transfer fee , claiming that Herrmann had promised him this money if the sale was completed . McGraw convinced Seymour not to hold out , which could have set a precedent for players obtaining money in player transactions . He batted .286 in 1906 for the Reds and Giants , finishing eighth in the NL . 
 Seymour finished fifth in the NL in batting average ( .294 ) for the 1907 season . However , an ankle injury prematurely ended his season . His batting average declined to .267 for the 1908 season . That year , he participated in one of baseball 's most infamous plays , known as Merkle 's Boner , in which the Giants lost the pennant to the Chicago Cubs . In the replayed game between the Giants and Cubs , Giants pitcher Christy Mathewson reportedly waved Seymour to move further back in the outfield ; Seymour refused , only to see the ball hit over his head , allowing the Cubs to score three runs on their way to the win . Mathewson later denied waving Seymour back , saying Seymour " knew the Chicago batters as well as [ he ] did and how to play them . " 
 As there were no full @-@ time base coaches at the time , players took turns in the role . While coaching at third base , Seymour tackled teammate Moose McCormick as he rounded third base and headed for home plate , in an attempt to keep McCormick at third . McCormick overpowered Seymour and scored . When McGraw asked why , Seymour made an excuse about having the sun in his eyes . This led McGraw , now realizing the need for a full @-@ time coach , to hire Arlie Latham for the role , the first full @-@ time coach in MLB . Seymour got into an altercation with Latham in March 1909 at the team 's hotel , prompting McGraw to seek a buyer for Seymour . Seymour apologized to McGraw , who responded by suspending Seymour for eight weeks . However , Seymour injured his right leg in his first game back from the suspension . This injury limited his effectiveness for the rest of his career . As a part @-@ time player that season , he batted .311 , best among NL reserves . He again played a reserve role for the Giants in 1910 , batting .265 in 79 games . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 The minor league Baltimore Orioles of the Class @-@ A Eastern League purchased Seymour from the Giants on August 24 , 1910 . After playing for the Orioles in the 1911 season , they sold him to the Newark Indians of the Class @-@ AA International League , where he played during the 1912 season . Seymour became property of the Los Angeles Angels of the Class @-@ A Pacific Coast League after the 1912 season , but he secured his release from the Angels without playing a game for them , 
 Seymour subsequently signed as a free agent with the Boston Braves on February 25 , 1913 . After playing sparingly for the Braves during the 1913 season , the Braves released him on July 19 , 1913 , as they were carrying 26 players on their roster , though league rules permitted a maximum roster of 25 . Seymour played for the Buffalo Bisons of the Class @-@ A International League after being released by the Braves . He returned to professional baseball in 1918 , playing in 13 games for the Newark Bears of the International League . 
 = = After baseball = = 
 Seymour was declared physically unfit for service in World War I. However , he worked in wartime jobs in the Speedway shipyards and Bush terminal . While working in the shipyards , he contracted tuberculosis , and died at his home on September 20 , 1919 . He was interred in Albany Rural Cemetery . 
 = = Career perspective = = 
 Few players enjoyed as much success as Seymour as both a pitcher and hitter ; only Babe Ruth recorded more combined pitching victories and hits . As a pitcher , Seymour threw a fastball , a curveball , and a screwball . Orioles catcher Wilbert Robinson said that he had never caught a pitcher as wild as Seymour , as opposing batters did " not know whether their head or feet were in most danger . " 
 In his 16 @-@ year MLB career , Seymour hit 52 home runs with 799 RBI , 1 @,@ 723 hits , 222 stolen bases , and a .303 batting average . He also won 61 games as a pitcher . Seymour was posthumously inducted in the Cincinnati Reds Hall of Fame in 1998 . 
 The New York World listed Seymour as one of the best players in baseball , along with Mathewson , Ed Walsh , Honus Wagner , Nap Lajoie , and Roger Bresnahan . Elmer Flick insisted that Seymour was the toughest pitcher he batted against , saying he " was practically unhittable " and that Seymour " had a wonderful control of his curve ball . " 
 According to a formula for evaluating baseball players developed by Bill James , Seymour ranks above Hall of Famers Lloyd <unk> , Jimmy Collins , and Joe Tinker . 
 = Rögnvaldr Óláfsson ( d . 1249 ) = 
 Rögnvaldr Óláfsson ( Norwegian : Ragnvald , English : Ranald or Reginald , Old Norse : Rǫgnvaldr ; died 30 May 1249 ) was a mid @-@ thirteenth @-@ century King of Mann and the Isles who was assassinated after a reign of less than a month . As a son of Óláfr Guðrøðarson , King of Mann and the Isles , Rögnvaldr Óláfsson was a member of the Crovan dynasty . When his father died in 1237 , the kingship was assumed by Haraldr Óláfsson . The latter was lost at sea late in 1248 , and the following year Rögnvaldr Óláfsson succeeded him as king . 
 Only weeks after gaining the kingship , Rögnvaldr Óláfsson was slain by a knight named Ívarr and his accomplices . The kingship was then seized by Haraldr Guðrøðarson , Rögnvaldr Óláfsson 's first cousin once removed , suggesting that the killers and the new king had colluded together . The assassination , therefore , appears to have been a continuation of the vicious family feud that had engulfed the Crovan dynasty since the late twelfth century , when Rögnvaldr Óláfsson 's father and Haraldr Guðrøðarson 's grandfather first contested the kingship of the Isles . 
 = = Background = = 
 Rögnvaldr Óláfsson was one of several sons of Óláfr Guðrøðarson , King of Mann and the Isles ( died 1237 ) , and thus a member of the Crovan dynasty . Although Óláfr is known to have had two wives , and no contemporaneous source names the mother of his children , there is evidence suggesting that their mother may have been Óláfr 's second wife : Cristina , daughter of Ferchar mac an <unk> , Earl of Ross ( died c . 1251 ) . Specifically , the Chronicle of Mann states that , when Óláfr died in 1237 , he was succeeded by his fourteen @-@ year @-@ old son , Haraldr Óláfsson ( died 1248 ) . This source therefore dates Haraldr Óláfsson 's birth to 1223 , about the time when Óláfr and Ferchar allied themselves in marriage . The ancestral origins of Ferchar 's family are unknown , although he appears to have been a native of eastern Ross . The Norse @-@ Gaelic Crovan dynasty , founded by Rögnvaldr Óláfsson 's paternal great @-@ great grandfather , held royal power in the Isles from the late eleventh to the mid thirteenth century . Consisting of a region roughly encompassing the Hebrides and Mann , the Isles are named in Old Norse sources as Suðreyjar ( " Southern Isles " ) , and in Gaelic sources as Innsi Gall ( " Islands of the Foreigners " ) . Various documentary sources , in the form of contemporary chronicles and sagas , reveal that during the dynasty 's tenure of power , the kings of the Isles tended to acknowledge the authority of the kings of Norway . 
 From the later twelfth- to the mid thirteenth century , the dynasty suffered from bitter factionalism and vicious kin @-@ strife . Rögnvaldr Óláfsson 's father , Óláfr , was a younger son of Guðrøðr Óláfsson , King of Dublin and the Isles ( died 1187 ) . According to the chronicle , before his death in 1187 , Guðrøðr Óláfsson instructed that Óláfr should succeed to the kingship . The latter was only a child at the time , however , and the Islesmen instead inaugurated Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson ( died 1229 ) , Guðrøðr Óláfsson 's eldest albeit illegitimate son . As the first quarter of the thirteenth century began to wane , contentions between the half @-@ brothers broke out into outright war . By the turn of the first quarter of the century , Óláfr managed to put aside the wife that Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson had assigned him ; and afterwards married Cristina , thereby gaining her father 's military assistance . As time wore on , Óláfr gained the upper @-@ hand in the struggle , and at one point had Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson 's son , Guðrøðr Rögnvaldsson ( died 1231 ) , blinded and castrated . The bitter conflict between the half @-@ brothers ended with Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson 's treacherous death in 1229 . For a brief period in 1230 / 1231 , Óláfr co @-@ ruled the kingdom with Guðrøðr Rögnvaldsson . When the latter was slain in 1231 , Óláfr ruled the entire kingdom without any internal opposition until his own death in 1237 . 
 The main documentary source for the kings of the Crovan dynasty is the Chronicle of Mann , the only contemporary indigenous narrative @-@ source concerning these men . The source itself survives in the form of a fourteenth @-@ century Latin manuscript , which is in turn a copy of a chronicle probably first commissioned and composed during the reign of Magnús Óláfsson , King of Mann and the Isles ( died 1265 ) . About fifteen percent of the chronicle is devoted to the strife between the half @-@ brothers , and much of the rest of this source deals with the after @-@ effects of the conflict . Although the chronicle 's account of the half @-@ brothers ' struggle appears to be somewhat neutral , its treatment of their descendants is clearly slanted in favour of Óláfr 's sons . In fact , it was only during the reign of Óláfr 's son Magnús , that the former 's sons finally overcame Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson 's descendants once and for all . The chronicle , therefore , may have been composed to further legitimise king 's descended from Óláfr . In consequence , even the chronicle 's claim that Óláfr 's father had chosen him as his successor may be suspect . Whatever the case , the chronicle is the main historical source for the life of Rögnvaldr Óláfsson . 
 = = Ascension and assassination = = 
 Having succeeded his father , the chronicle reveals that Haraldr Óláfsson was soon ousted from power by representatives of Hákon Hákonarson , King of Norway ( died 1263 ) . After unsuccessfully repulsing these men , Haraldr Óláfsson voyaged to Norway , where he stayed for about three years , and thus reconciled himself with Hákon , who in turn reinstalled him as king in the Isles . In 1247 , the late mid thirteenth @-@ century Hákonar saga Hákonarsonar states that Haraldr Óláfsson again journeyed to Norway , where he married Hákon 's daughter , <unk> , in the winter of 1247 / 1248 . On the newly @-@ weds ' return voyage in the autumn of 1248 , the chronicle and saga report that their ship foundered off Shetland , with all aboard lost . The kingship was subsequently assumed by Rögnvaldr Óláfsson , with the chronicle dating his accession to 6 May 1249 . The latter 's reign was an extremely short one , lasting hardly a month , as the chronicle states that he was slain on 30 May 1249 . Rögnvaldr Óláfsson 's body was then interred at Rushen Abbey , the site of his father 's final resting place . Following the killing , the chronicle reports that the kingship was seized by Haraldr Guðrøðarson , a grandson of Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson . 
 Although the chronicle names Rögnvaldr Óláfsson 's killers as a knight named Ívarr and his followers , the precise identity of Ívarr is uncertain . One man bearing the same name was Rögnvaldr Óláfsson 's paternal uncle , Ívarr Guðrøðarson . Although the latter is noted by the chronicle , in an entry concerning his father 's demise , nothing more is known of him , and it is unlikely that someone born before 1187 would have been active in 1249 . The chronicle 's Latin designation of " <unk> " ( " knight " ) to Ívarr may be evidence that he was a member of the elite . The fact that he is not accorded a patronym of any sort , however , suggests that he was not a member of a prominent family ( such as the Crovan dynasty ) . In fact , he appears to be identical to the " domino <unk> ' de Mann " ( " Lord Ívarr of Mann " ) , who witnessed a Latin charter of Haraldr Óláfsson in 1246 . Ívarr 's identity aside , the chronology of events surrounding Rögnvaldr Óláfsson 's killing suggests that Haraldr Guðrøðarson and Ívarr were allies . A particular letter of Henry III , King of England ( died 1272 ) , dated April 1256 , commanding his men not to receive Haraldr Guðrøðarson and Ívarr — the men whom the letter states " wickedly slew " Rögnvaldr Óláfsson — further evidences an alliance between the two . 
 In light of Ívarr 's possible collusion with Haraldr Guðrøðarson , the slaying of Rögnvaldr Óláfsson may be evidence that the continuing strife between the rival branches descended from the half @-@ brothers , Rögnvaldr Guðrøðarson and Óláfr , continued well into the mid thirteenth century . In fact , the killing is the last recorded example of regicide in the Norse @-@ Gaelic realm , and may partly evidence the Europeanisation of the peripheral regions of the British Isles during the twelfth- and thirteenth centuries . As it turned out , the reign of Rögnvaldr Óláfsson 's successor was short @-@ lived , since Haraldr Guðrøðarson was recalled to Norway in 1250 , for having unjustly seized the kingship . Once in Norway , the latter was detained from returning to the Isles , and is not heard of again . Within two years , Rögnvaldr Óláfsson 's brother , Magnús , was installed in the kingship . The latter reigned until his death in 1265 , and was the last member of the Crovan dynasty to rule as king in the Isles . An after @-@ effect of the inter @-@ dynastic warring within the Crovan dynasty was the partitioning of the kingdom between rival factions . For example , from about 1187 to 1226 , and for a brief period in 1229 , the kingdom was divided between the half @-@ brothers ; and for a brief period in 1230 / 1231 it was divided between Óláfr and his nephew , Guðrøðr Rögnvaldsson . Although Haraldr Óláfsson appears to have reigned over a united kingdom , the years between his death and the installation of Magnús in 1252 is a murky period indeed , and it is possible that the kingdom was divided between rival factions during this brief span of years . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = In Your House 1 = 
 In Your House ( retroactively titled In Your House : Premiere , and sequentially known as In Your House 1 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) , which took place on May 14 , 1995 , at the Onondaga War Memorial in Syracuse , New York . It was the first pay @-@ per @-@ view of the In Your House series and consisted of ten professional wrestling matches . 
 In the main event WWF World Heavyweight Champion Diesel defeated Sid to retain his title . In the undercard Bret Hart defeated Hakushi , but lost to Jerry Lawler , whereas Razor Ramon defeated Jeff Jarrett and The Roadie in a two @-@ on @-@ one handicap match . 
 The pay @-@ per @-@ view received a 0 @.@ 83 buyrate , equivalent to approximately 332 @,@ 000 buys . 
 = = Background = = 
 The pay @-@ per @-@ view was the first ever under the In Your House banner , which signaled the beginning of the WWF 's monthly pay @-@ per @-@ views . The In Your House pay @-@ per @-@ views were promoted at US $ 14 @.@ 95 , which was cheaper than WWF 's other pay @-@ per @-@ views , in an effort to increase its revenue from the pay @-@ per @-@ view market after several years out of the spotlight . 
 The most prominent rivalry heading into the pay @-@ per @-@ view was between then @-@ WWF Champion Diesel and his storyline rival Sid . At the previous pay @-@ per @-@ view , WrestleMania XI , Diesel defeated Shawn Michaels to retain the WWF Championship , partly due to an interference by Michaels ' bodyguard Sid backfiring . The following night , Michaels stated that for a potential rematch , he would give Sid the night off , causing the bodyguard to turn on Michaels by powerbombing him three times . Diesel eventually came out to help Michaels . Michaels was legitimately injured , and this sidelined him for six weeks , effectively shelving plans for a rematch between Diesel and Michaels . Diesel was then scheduled to defend his title against Bam Bam Bigelow , a member of the Million Dollar Corporation stable , after a staged confrontation between the two on the April 16 , 1995 episode of Action Zone , a secondary television program for the WWF . On the same day , on Wrestling Challenge , another secondary television program , in a segment featuring the Corporation , Bigelow was noticeably snubbed , signaling a turn . Over the weekend of April 16 , a match between Sid and Diesel was scheduled for In Your House , in which Sid could potentially face Diesel for the WWF Championship , depending on whether he retained or lost his title against Bigelow . On the April 24 episode of Raw , Sid stated he was unhappy about this stipulation , as it meant that if Bigelow won , Sid would not get a shot at the title . Diesel retained the title when the Corporation turned on Bigelow , with Tatanka tripping Bigelow as he ran off the ropes . Diesel hit Bigelow with a big boot and executed a powerbomb for the win . After the contest , Bigelow was insulted by Ted DiBiase and attacked by the Corporation . Diesel , who had gone back to the locker room , came to Bigelow 's aid . In Sid 's match with Razor Ramon on the May 1 episode of Raw , Diesel approached the ring ready to fight Sid , who , along with the Corporation 's manager DiBiase , left the arena abruptly . The following week on Raw , DiBiase revealed that he and Sid had been working together for a while , admitting that it was him who told Shawn Michaels to get a bodyguard . 
 Prior to the event , the feud between Bret Hart and Jerry Lawler , which dated back to King of the Ring 1993 , was revived to also include Hakushi . After Hart won the WWF Magazine " Award of the People " on the February 20 , 1995 episode of Raw , Jerry Lawler suggested that Japanese votes had been excluded and that Hart was a racist . Lawler persuaded Hakushi that Hart was a racist , and on the March 25 episode of Superstars of Wrestling , Hakushi attacked Bret after he received a separate award from the Japanese media . On the April 10 episode of Raw , Bret teamed up with the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid and Bob Holly to take on Hakushi and the WWF Tag Team Champions , Owen Hart and Yokozuna . Bret 's team won the match as Holly pinned Owen . On the April 23 episode of Wrestling Challenge a match between Bret and Hakushi was set for In Your House . On the same day , on Action Zone , Bret teamed with Razor Ramon to take on WWF Intercontinental Champion Jeff Jarrett ( accompanied by The Roadie ) and Hakushi . Bret and Ramon won the match , with Ramon pinning Jarrett . On the May 1 episode of Raw , Bret offered to face Lawler at In Your House after his scheduled match with Hakushi . Bret dedicated his match with Lawler at In Your House to his mother , as the pay @-@ per @-@ view was going to take place on Mother 's Day . Lawler also responded that on the May 8 episode of Raw that his mother was going to be at ringside for their encounter . 
 The most prominent rivalry on the undercard was for the WWF Intercontinental Championship . The feud took place between Razor Ramon , the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid , the Intercontinental Champion Jeff Jarrett , and his personal enforcer , The Roadie . Ramon and Jarrett faced each other at WrestleMania XI , but Jarrett was disqualified . Jarrett faced Aldo Montoya on the April 8 episode of Superstars of Wrestling in a non @-@ title match , where Jarrett accidentally pinned himself ( he never lifted his shoulder off the ground after being slammed to the mat by Montoya ) . Jarrett was initially announced the winner , but Montoya was later declared the winner . Jarrett and Montoya faced each other again two weeks later , on the April 22 episode of Superstars of Wrestling . During the match , Razor Ramon came to ringside and chased The Roadie backstage . Despite this , Jarrett managed to gain the victory , making Montoya submit to the figure four leglock . The next day on Wrestling Challenge , Ramon and the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid were scheduled to square off against Jarrett and The Roadie at In Your House . After the 1 – 2 – 3 Kid a legit neck injury rendered Kid unable to wrestle , the match was changed into a Handicap match , in which Ramon would face both Jarrett and The Roadie by himself . 
 The other main rivalry on the undercard was for the WWF Tag Team Championship between the team of Owen Hart and Yokozuna and The Smoking Gunns ( Billy and Bart ) . The Smoking Gunns dropped their WWF Tag Team Championship to Hart and Yokozuna at WrestleMania XI , the previous pay @-@ per @-@ view event . Their rivalry was reignited on the April 23 episode of Action Zone , when the Blu Brothers ( Don and Ron Harris ) faced the New Headshrinkers ( <unk> and Fatu ) . Hart and Yokozuna interfered in the contest , attacking the New Headshrinkers , causing a disqualification . The Smoking Gunns ran to the ring , attacking Hart and Yokozuna . The Headshrinkers posed with Hart and Yokozuna 's tag team belts and celebrated with the Smoking Gunns . The following night , on Raw , the Smoking Gunns were awarded a rematch for the WWF Tag Team Championship at the In Your House pay @-@ per @-@ view . They made their intentions of winning the title clear by quickly defeating Barry Horowitz and the Brooklyn Brawler . In their last encounter before the event , Bart defeated Hart via pinfall on the May 8 episode of Raw . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event went live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , Jean @-@ Pierre Lafitte defeated Bob Holly in a standard dark match . In the weeks preceding the event , the WWF ran a competition to win a house in Orlando , Florida . Todd Pettengill and Stephanie <unk> showed footage of the home and later hand @-@ picked one of the entries . They phoned Matt <unk> of Henderson , Nevada and told him that he and his family had won the vacant home . The home was officially presented to <unk> on the May 22 episode of Raw . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match that aired was a standard match between Bret Hart and Hakushi ( managed by <unk> ) . Bret announced before the contest that he was dedicating his performances to his mother because it was Mother 's Day . Jerry Lawler , who faced Bret later in the pay @-@ per @-@ view , watched the match backstage on a monitor . Bret won the contest , when he rolled @-@ up Hakushi to gain a pinfall and end Hakushi 's six @-@ month @-@ long undefeated streak . As Hart jumped to the arena floor after the contest , he appeared to legitimately injure his knee . 
 A two @-@ on @-@ one Handicap match was next as Razor Ramon faced Intercontinental Champion Jeff Jarrett and The Roadie . During the match , Jarrett went to perform the figure four leglock submission hold , but Ramon blocked the maneuver , sending Jarrett to collide with his partner . Ramon performed his " Razor 's Edge " finishing move and pinned Jarrett for the victory . After the contest , Ramon tried to perform the " Razor 's Edge " on The Roadie , but Jarrett attacked him and applied the figure four leglock . Aldo Montoya went to ringside and attempted to help Ramon , but Jarrett and The Roadie threw him to the arena floor . An " unknown man " ran to the ring and attacked both Jarrett and The Roadie , and several people escorted the " unknown man " backstage . Later in the pay @-@ per @-@ view , Ramon introduced the " unknown man " as Savio Vega during an interview in the " WWF Hotline Room " , a fictitious interview room for the WWF . 
 A qualifying match for the 1995 King of the Ring tournament took place next as Mabel faced Adam Bomb in a standard match . The contest was one @-@ sided and ended in two minutes when Mabel pinned Bomb after he <unk> him down to the mat . Mabel advanced to the next round of the tournament , beginning a push for the superstar . 
 Next , Jerry Lawler went to the ring to give a promotional interview before his scheduled match with Bret Hart , declaring that he wanted his match with Bret to take place despite Bret 's injury . Lawler was then sent backstage by Tony Garea and Rene Goulet , and Bret was shown icing down his knee . 
 Next was a tag team match for the WWF Tag Team Championship , where the team of Owen Hart and Yokozuna ( managed by Jim Cornette and Mr. Fuji ) defended their titles against The Smoking Gunns ( Bart and Billy Gunn ) . Owen pinned Bart for the victory after Yokozuna delivered a leg drop to Bart 's chest , therefore retaining the championship . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 Before his match with Bret Hart , Lawler introduced a woman obviously younger than himself as his mother , and wished her a happy Mother 's Day . Moments before the contest , Hart revealed that his knee injury was fake . During the contest , referee Earl Hebner became tied upside down in the ropes after being distracted by <unk> . While Hebner was tied upside down , Hakushi interfered and performed a diving headbutt to Hart . Lawler won the match when he rolled @-@ up Hart for the pinfall . 
 The pay @-@ per @-@ view 's main event was a standard match for the WWF Championship , where the champion Diesel defended the title against Sid ( managed by Ted DiBiase ) . Late in the contest , Diesel performed a Jacknife Powerbomb on Sid and went for the pinfall . Tatanka came out and attacked Diesel , which resulted in Diesel retaining the championship via disqualification . Tatanka , along with DiBiase , attacked Diesel . Sid attempted to perform a powerbomb , but Bam Bam Bigelow ran to the ring , forcing the villains to go to the outside . 
 = = = Dark matches = = = 
 After the live pay @-@ per @-@ view went off the air there were 3 more dark matches . The first was between The Undertaker and Kama in a standard match , which The Undertaker won after giving Kama a " Tombstone Piledriver " . While this match was not shown on pay @-@ per @-@ view , it was included as a bonus match on the VHS home video release . 
 The next dark match was between Bigelow and Tatanka , which Bigelow won after diving off the top rope and hitting a sunset flip for the pin . This match was also included on the VHS home video release . 
 The final dark match of the night was a qualifier for the King of the Ring tournament between Davey Boy Smith and Owen Hart ( managed by Jim Cornette ) . The match went to a fifteen @-@ minute time @-@ limit draw . Unlike the other dark matches , this was taped for the June 5 episode of Raw . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The pay @-@ per @-@ view garnered 332 @,@ 000 buys , which is equivalent to a 0 @.@ 83 buyrate , a large number that generally surprised many pay @-@ per @-@ view providers . It had more buys than all the other In Your House pay @-@ per @-@ views , with In Your House : Good Friends , Better Enemies receiving the second highest buyrate of 324 @,@ 000 buys . 
 At the following pay @-@ per @-@ view , King of the Ring , Diesel teamed up with Bam Bam Bigelow to defeat Sid and Tatanka . Sid faced Diesel in a rematch for the WWF Championship at the In Your House 2 pay @-@ per @-@ view in a Lumberjack match . Diesel retained the title after hitting Sid with his boot . Mabel 's push culminated with him winning the King of the Ring tournament by defeating Savio Vega in the finals . With this , Mabel went on to face Diesel at SummerSlam for the WWF Championship , where Diesel retained the title . The rivalry between Bret Hart and Jerry Lawler also continued into King of the Ring , with the two facing each other at the event in a " Kiss My Foot " match . Hart won the match despite outside interference from Hakushi , making Lawler submit to the Sharpshooter . After the match , Hart forced Lawler to kiss his feet . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Battle of Osijek = 
 The Battle of Osijek ( Croatian : Bitka za Osijek ) was the artillery bombardment of the Croatian city of Osijek by the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) which took place from August 1991 to June 1992 during the Croatian War of Independence . Shelling peaked in late November and December 1991 , then diminished in 1992 after the Vance plan was accepted by the combatants . Airstrikes and attacks by JNA infantry and armored units against targets in the city accompanied the bombardment , which caused approximately 800 deaths and resulted in a large portion of the city 's population leaving . Croatian sources estimated that 6 @,@ 000 artillery shells were fired against Osijek over the period . 
 After the JNA captured Vukovar on 18 November 1991 , Osijek was the next target for its campaign in Croatia . The JNA units subordinated to the 12th ( Novi Sad ) Corps , supported by the Serb Volunteer Guard , achieved modest advances in late November and early December , capturing several villages south of Osijek , but the Croatian Army maintained its defensive front and limited the JNA 's advances . 
 In the aftermath of the Battle of Osijek , Croatian authorities charged thirteen JNA officers with war crimes against civilians , but no arrests have been made to date . Croatian authorities also charged the wartime commander of Osijek 's defence , Branimir Glavaš , and five others with war crimes committed in the city in 1991 . The five were convicted and received sentences ranging between eight and ten years , and as of March 2015 , judicial proceedings against Glavaš are in progress . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , following the electoral defeat of the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia , ethnic tensions worsened . The Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) confiscated the weapons of Croatia 's Territorial Defence ( Teritorijalna obrana – TO ) to minimize potential resistance . On 17 August 1990 , the escalating tensions turned into open revolt by the Croatian Serbs . The revolt took place in the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around Knin and in parts of the Lika , Kordun , Banovina regions and eastern Croatia . In January 1991 , Serbia , supported by Montenegro and Serbia 's provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo , made two unsuccessful attempts to obtain approval from the Yugoslav Presidency to deploy the JNA to disarm Croatian security forces . 
 After a bloodless skirmish between Serb insurgents and Croatian special police in March , the JNA itself , supported by Serbia and its allies , asked the federal Presidency to grant it wartime powers and declare a state of emergency . The request was denied on 15 March 1991 , and the JNA came under the control of Serbian President Slobodan Milošević in the summer of 1991 as the Yugoslav federation started to fall apart . By the end of the month , the conflict had escalated , resulting in the first fatalities of the war . The JNA then stepped in to support the insurgents and prevent Croatian police from intervening . In early April , leaders of the Serb revolt in Croatia announced their intention to integrate the areas under their control with Serbia . The Government of Croatia considered this an act of secession . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 The JNA intervened directly against Croatia for the first time on 3 July 1991 , driving Croatian forces out of Baranja , north of the city of Osijek , and out of Erdut , Aljmaš and Dalj east of Osijek . The advance was followed by intermittent fighting around Osijek , Vukovar and Vinkovci . At several points , JNA positions approached to within several hundred yards of Osijek city limits . 
 The JNA units near Osijek were subordinated to the 12th ( Novi Sad ) Corps , commanded by Major General Andrija <unk> . In the city itself , the JNA had several barracks which housed the 12th Proletarian Mechanised Brigade and the 12th Mixed Artillery Regiment . The 12th Proletarian Mechanised Brigade contained one of a handful battalions maintained by the JNA at full combat readiness . Osijek was established as their starting point in a planned westward offensive toward Našice and Bjelovar . 
 Croatian forces in the area were formally subordinated to the Operational Zone Command in Osijek headed by Colonel Karl <unk> . In practice , the city 's defense was overseen by Branimir Glavaš , then head of the National Defence Office in Osijek , according to information presented at Glavaš trial in the 2000s . Glavaš formally became commander of city defenses on 7 December 1991 . 
 = = = Bombardment of the city = = = 
 The JNA first attacked Osijek by mortar fire on 31 July 1991 , and heavily bombarded the city 's center on 19 August 1991 . The attacks came from positions north , east and south of Osijek , and were supported by JNA garrisons stationed in Osijek itself . On 7 – 9 September , an inconclusive battle was fought in <unk> , within three kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 miles ) of the city . The JNA garrisons were besieged by Croatian forces in mid @-@ September . After a barracks in the city centre was captured on 15 September 1991 , the remaining JNA garrison tried to break through the Croatian troops besieging the barracks and , after heavy fighting , reached JNA positions south of Osijek on 17 September 1991 . The intensity of the shelling increased thereafter , peaking through November and December . After a ceasefire was arranged in January 1992 , following the acceptance of the Vance plan , the artillery attacks dropped off and became intermittent , and ceased by June . 
 During its height , the intensity of the bombardment was reported to reach as high as one shell per minute , and the artillery attacks were compounded by Yugoslav Air Force strikes against the city . According to Croatian sources , a total of 6 @,@ 000 artillery shells were fired against Osijek in the period . Prior to the start of the bombardment , the civilian population of Osijek totaled 104 @,@ 761 city residents and 129 @,@ 792 municipal residents . These numbers were significantly reduced as civilians fled the fighting . It is estimated that only about a third of the population remained in the city by the end of November , with some sources placing the estimate even lower , suggesting that the population of the city was reduced to just 10 @,@ 000 civilians during the most intense periods of the bombardment . Those who remained in Osijek through the fighting generally slept in bomb shelters . 
 = = = Ground offensive = = = 
 After JNA captured Vukovar on 18 November , the JNA 12th ( Novi Sad ) Corps , supported by the Serbian Ministry of Interior @-@ trained Serb Volunteer Guard paramilitaries , started to advance west between Vinkovci and Osijek on 20 November . The city of Osijek appeared to be the next target of the JNA , which was later confirmed by General Života Panić , commander of the JNA 1st Military District . 
 On 21 November 1991 , the JNA captured the villages of Stari <unk> , Novi <unk> and Ernestinovo situated approximately ten kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 miles ) south of Osijek . <unk> , five kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 miles ) south of Ernestinovo , was captured three days later . Those developments threatened Đakovo and pointed to the potential encirclement of Osijek . On 4 December 1991 , the Special Envoy of Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations Cyrus Vance visited Osijek to inspect the damage . 
 In early December , the JNA made modest advances , capturing <unk> located six kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 miles ) south of Osijek on 5 December 1991 . On the same day , an armoured JNA force unsuccessfully attacked positions held by the Croatian 106th Brigade in <unk> Forest near <unk> , approximately two kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 miles ) east of Osijek . On 6 December , the JNA pushed Croatian troops out from <unk> , followed by a heavy attack against Osijek repulsed by the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska – HV ) on 7 December . On 11 December , HV personnel entered the frontline village of Paulin Dvor , less than three kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 miles ) kilometers west of Ernestinovo , and summarily executed 19 civilians ( 18 Serbs and one Hungarian ) . The JNA captured Paulin Dvor five days later , on 16 December , and attacked Osijek once again . The HV managed to contain the attack , though fighting continued south of Osijek until January 1992 . 
 = = = Operation Devil 's Beam = = = 
 Advances of the JNA north of Osijek threatened HV control of a narrow bridgehead held across the Drava River skirting the city 's northern edge . By mid @-@ December the bridgehead was reduced to a strip of land opposite Osijek , encompassing suburban settlements of <unk> and <unk> . In order to remove the threat , the HV launched an offensive codenamed Operation Devil 's Beam ( Croatian : Operacija <unk> <unk> ) on 17 – 18 December . The offensive , involving the 1st Battalion of the 135th Brigade , elements of the special forces Frankopan Battalion and the Osijek @-@ based Orao special police unit , Drava River flotilla , artillery of the 106th Brigade , and personnel of the 4th Beli Manastir Police Station , successfully pushed the JNA north , across Stara Drava oxbow lake located approximately four kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 miles ) north of Osijek . The JNA also withdrew from the village of Kopačevo towards Darda and <unk> , but the HV did not have sufficient resources to exploit the development . The HV lost eight killed in the offensive , but the JNA 's advance towards Osijek from the north was halted . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 By June 1992 , approximately 800 people had been killed by the bombardment . By the end of the Croatian War of Independence in 1995 , a total of 1 @,@ 724 people from Osijek had been killed , including 1 @,@ 327 soldiers and 397 civilians . The city itself suffered great damage during the war , with the bulk of direct damage occurring as a consequence of the 1991 – 92 bombardment . Direct war damage sustained by the city was estimated at a total of US $ 1 @.@ 3 billion . The damage was regularly recorded by 400 volunteers during the bombardment . 
 Although media reported on the bombardment of Osijek , journalists in the city itself felt that it was receiving an unduly low level of media coverage compared to wartime events elsewhere in Croatia . The attacks on Osijek were welcomed by the <unk> newspaper published by the Serbian Orthodox Church , which appeared to give a blessing to the attack as a part of a " holy war " , setting it in the context of World War II massacres and concentration camps in the Independent State of Croatia . 
 The JNA withdrew from Croatia in 1992 , but continued to contribute personnel and equipment to the Army of the Republic of Serbian Krajina ( ARSK ) which controlled the areas previously held by the JNA . Although the United Nations Protection Force peacekeepers deployed to the area on the basis of the Vance plan and placed most of the ARSK heavy weapons in storage , Osijek was intermittently bombarded throughout the war — the last artillery strike occurred in September 1995 . The hostilities ceased in November 1995 through the Erdut Agreement securing restoration of Croatian rule in the region . 
 In November 2010 , then @-@ Croatian President Ivo Josipović officially apologized for the Paulin Dvor massacre , shortly after his Serbian counterpart Boris Tadić issued a formal apology for the massacre at Vukovar . 
 = = = War crime trials = = = 
 In 2008 , Croatian authorities formally charged Colonel Boro Ivanović , commanding officer of the JNA 12th Proletarian Mechanised Brigade , and twelve other JNA officers with war crimes against the civilian population . The charges include causing the deaths of 307 civilians in Osijek and surrounding areas , injuries to another 171 civilians , and the destruction of at least 1 @,@ 188 different structures . As of 2013 , all of the indicted officers remain at large in Serbia . 
 In 2005 , the Osijek District Court convicted former Croatian soldier Nikola <unk> for his involvement in the killings at Paulin Dvor , and sentenced him to 15 years in prison . In 2012 , Enes <unk> was also convicted for his involvement in the atrocity , and given an eleven @-@ year sentence . 
 After the war , five Croatian fighters were charged and convicted of eleven counts of murder , one of attempted murder , and one of torture of Serb civilians found in the JNA barracks , which surrendered on 15 September 1991 . They received prison sentences of between five and eight years . Glavaš , who was tried alongside them for the same crimes , received a ten @-@ year sentence . Before the conviction became final in 2009 , and to avoid extradition , Glavaš fled to Bosnia and Herzegovina , where he had granted citizenship . His sentence was reduced to eight years and became final in 2010 , when he was arrested and imprisoned in Bosnia and Herzegovina . In January 2015 , the conviction was set aside by the Constitutional Court of Croatia , pending a new trial before the Supreme Court of Croatia . 
 = Cubs Win Flag = 
 The Cubs Win Flag is a victory flag that is flown at Wrigley Field after every Chicago Cubs home win . The flag is variously referred to by approximately a dozen names , combining ; either Cubs or Chicago Cubs ; Win , W , White , White W , or W Win ; and flag , banner or banner flag . Other common names for the symbol include Chicago Cubs W Win Flag and Chicago Cubs Win Banner Flag . It has become an important symbol for fans that one retailer describes as a fan banner instead of flag , or banner flag . In addition , days when the win flag is flown are known as " White Flag Days " . The tradition of flying a win or loss flag over the stadium began soon after the construction of the scoreboard in 1937 . 
 The flag has used two different color schemes with the letter " W " on a solid background , and there is a loss indicator flag with a letter " L " . Additionally , the flags have been complemented by different color schemes of indicator lights . The flag is also changed after each Cubs win . The flag has become a very symbolic emblem for devout Cubs fans . Some retailers sell slightly different versions that also have the Cubs logo at the bottom . 
 = = Detail = = 
 Flying a flag over Wrigley field to denote wins and losses is a longstanding tradition . Currently , the Win Flag is composed of a large blue letter " W " on a white background while the Loss Flag is a large white letter " L " on a blue background . The phrase " White flag time at Wrigley ! " is therefore used to explain that the Cubs have just won that day 's home game . The flag is raised by a scoreboard crew member immediately after the completion of a game , and in the case of a doubleheader split , both flags are flown . 
 It is customary to fly flags from sunrise until sunset , unless they are directly illuminated . At the beginning of each day , the cross @-@ shaped " masthead " atop the center field scoreboard displays the American flag at the top , and three strands of flags bearing the colors and nicknames of each of the National League clubs , one strand per Division in order of that day 's standings . Immediately after the game , one of the strands of flags is lowered , and either the W or the L @-@ lettered flag is raised in its place . The W @-@ lettered flag is raised on the left field side of the board , above the blue light that also indicates a win . The L @-@ lettered flag is raised on the right field side of the board , above the white light that indicates a loss . Once the Win or Loss Flag has been raised , the other flags are lowered and also stowed away inside the scoreboard . 
 The symbolism of the flag now serves a wide variety of purposes . It is commonly reproduced in 3 by 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 by 1 @.@ 52 m ) dimensions , and car flag versions are also sold . The flag is also available in 2 by 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 by 0 @.@ 91 m ) dimension versions . The flag has become a celebratory symbol for Chicago Cubs fans who purchase reproductions and take them to games at home and on the road to show support . The fans wave them after victories at Wrigley Field , and they hang them in the stands during playoff series . Some fans fly a win flag in place of or in addition to the Flag of the United States on days when the Cubs win . Since 1998 , the flags have become ever more popular , with demand reaching a level where they are sold at Wrigley field . In 2007 , with the Cubs in playoff contention for the first time in 3 years , the Cubs ' victory tune , Go Cubs Go ! became more popular among the fans . Due to the song 's growing popularity , after wins at home , Cubs TV broadcasters Len Kasper and Bob Brenly would have their microphones shut off , while the camera pans around the stadium to view the jubilant fans as Go Cubs Go ! plays in the background . After fans discovered this , they started purchasing " W " flags and waving them after wins at home as an attempt to get on TV . However , in seasons when the Cubs are performing poorly the tradition has led to parody and satire , such as stories of the Cubs retiring the win flag due to signs of neglect . While not having the popularity of the Win Flag , the Loss Flag has become increasingly popular with clubs who traditionally have rivalries with the Cubs , such as the St. Louis Cardinals , Milwaukee Brewers or Chicago White Sox . Fans of those teams wave the blue flag after their team defeats the Cubs at Busch Stadium or U.S. Cellular Field . However , because of the enormous fan base that the Cubs hold , it isn 't un @-@ common to see fans at games on the road waving their " W " flags during Cubs wins on the road . 
 The flag is known by many names , with none being more prevalent than the rest , and may often be referred to by more than one name by the same manufacturer . " Chicago Cubs W Win Flag " is the name used on Amazon.com , however the company also refers to the flag as Chicago Cubs ' W ' Banner Flag in their marketplace section . <unk> also refers to the flag by the name Chicago Cubs ' W ' Banner Flag . Other retailers use the names Cubs Win W Flag , Chicago Cubs Win 3 ' x 5 ' Flag , Cubs W Flag , or ( Chicago Cubs ) W Flag in the case of Sports Fan Warehouse . One retailer even sells an item called the Chicago Cubs W Fan Banner . Another retailer sells two versions of the flag listed as Chicago Cubs Win W Flag and Chicago Cubs Win Flag , yet its advertisements mentions celebrating a Cub win with the Chicago Cubs White " W " Flag . An alternate version that has the Chicago Cubs logo beneath the W can be found under the name Chicago Cubs Win W Banner . 
 = = History = = 
 The Cubs ' then @-@ owner Philip K. Wrigley ordered the reconstruction of the bleachers and the building of the manually operated scoreboard in 1937 . The scoreboard 's " masthead " was in place by 1938 , displaying the American flag at the top and flags representing the eight clubs of the National League on the left and right strands of the masthead , four apiece . In the 1940s , the practice of raising the Win / Loss flags was begun . 
 The flags were originally a white " W " on a blue flag and a blue " L " on a white flag . This matched what was then the color scheme of the Cubs " team flags " that flew on the foul poles , and the many little " W.F. " flags that flew on the grandstand roof ( all of them serving to give the players a sense of the wind speed and direction ) . Ernie Banks was the first Cub to have his number retired on August 22 , 1982 , and his number 14 has been flown in blue on a white flag ( echoing the pattern of a Cubs home uniform shirt ) on the left field foul pole ever since . On August 13 , 1987 , Billy Williams had his number retired and it flew with the same color scheme , on the right field foul pole . The scheme of the Cubs Win flag was reversed in the early 1980s . The change in the flag color scheme matched the Win flag color with the honored colors of the retired number flags , as the white @-@ on @-@ blue Cubs " team flag " was retired . Subsequent retired Cubs numbers for Ron Santo , Ryne Sandberg and Ferguson Jenkins / Greg Maddux also match this color scheme . 
 In addition to the flags , Wrigley authorized Bill Veeck , the leader of the bleacher reconstruction project , to add colored lights on the crossbar of the masthead so that the Chicago ' L ' passengers would be able to see the outcome of Cubs home games after sunset . In his autobiography , Veeck remembered the colors as green for a win and red for a loss . <unk> 's book acknowledges Veeck 's comments , but reports that contemporary newspapers stated that the colors of the lights were blue and white , as they are now . Eventually the original lights on the masthead were replaced by lights directly on the top of scoreboard , still visible from outside Wrigley field . The lights complement the flags by helping night time passersby learn the result of that day 's Cubs game at a glance . The current blue and white Win / Loss lights were added atop the scoreboard in 1978 . 
 On April 23 , 2008 the Cubs won for the 10,000th time in the history of the franchise on the road against the Colorado Rockies . Like the <unk> win , the 10,000th win came in a 7 – 6 victory at Coors Field . The Cubs were the second franchise to achieve 10 @,@ 000 regular season wins ; the San Francisco Giants / New York Giants were the first . The franchise flew a special 10,000th win flag along with a Cubs Win flag to commemorate the landmark achievement for the franchise . This was unusual not just for the 10,000th win , but also for flying the flag in reference to a road game . The special flag flew from the afternoon of April 24 , 2008 until immediately prior to the next home game on April 29 , 2008 at 7 : <unk> against the Milwaukee Brewers . After the flag was taken down , it was autographed by all members of the 2008 Chicago Cubs and auctioned off for charity . 
 = The Amazing Maleeni = 
 " The Amazing Maleeni " is the eighth episode of the seventh season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on January 16 , 2000 . It was written by Vince Gilligan , John Shiban , and Frank Spotnitz and directed by Thomas J. Wright . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " The Amazing Maleeni " earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 @.@ 4 , being watched by 16 @.@ 18 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed reviews . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , The Amazing Maleeni , a small @-@ time magician , performs an amazing feat to impress a heckler — he turns his head 360 degrees . So when he is later found without a head at all , Mulder and Scully arrive on the case and discover an angry ex @-@ con , an unimpressed rival , and Maleeni ’ s twin brother . All seem to have something to do with a plan to rob a major bank . 
 Although written by Gilligan , Shiban , and Spotnitz , the story for " The Amazing Maleeni " was conceived largely by executive producer Frank Spotnitz , who had wanted to do an episode dealing with " magic and illusion " since the show 's second season . Real @-@ life magician Ricky Jay , who also was Spotnitz 's favorite , was brought in to play the part of the titular Maleeni . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Santa Monica , California , a magician , The Amazing Maleeni , twists his head completely around at a carnival , while Billy LaBonge , another magician , heckles Maleeni during the event . As he 's leaving , his severed head falls completely off . Billy LaBonge is later questioned by Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) ; he tells the agents that he thought Maleeni was a ripoff . During the autopsy , Scully finds that , although Maleeni 's head was cleanly cut off , he died of a heart attack . She also finds that he was dead for at least a month and refrigerated , even though the carnival manager spoke to him mere moments leading up to his head falling off . 
 Meanwhile , LaBonge finds a man named Cissy Alvarez whom Maleeni owed money . LaBonge admits that he caused Maleeni 's head to fall off , and says that he will give Alvarez the money he is owed if he helps him with his magic . Mulder and Scully learn that Maleeni has an identical twin brother , Albert . Albert , interestingly enough is even wearing a <unk> , which he says he got in a car accident in Mexico . Mulder tells him he thinks he did the magic act , but the man shows that he has no legs , which he also lost in Mexico in the car accident . Back at work , Alvarez threatens Pinchbeck that he will kill him if he does not get his money . LaBonge then frames Alvarez for a robbery by attacking a security truck disguised as Alvarez . Mulder soon finds out that Pinchbeck is the real Maleeni and that he faked having no legs . After confronting Pinchbeck , he admits that he faked his own death in order to get out of Alvarez 's debt . Pinchbeck admits that he found his brother dead of a heart attack at home and used his body as a double . Pinchbeck is promptly arrested , as is LaBonge , who brings a gun to a bar , in an attempt to purposely get arrested . In addition , Alvarez is arrested because of the attempted robbery LaBonge did earlier . 
 The vault at Pinchbeck 's work is emptied and the money is found above Alvarez ' bar . Later Mulder and Scully confront LaBonge and Maleeni as they are released on bail , where Mulder explains that he figured out their plan - LaBonge and Pinchbeck were not , in fact , enemies , and that they had been working together to put Alvarez in prison for making LaBonge 's life miserable in prison 8 years prior , and that , as masters of sleight of hand and escape tricks , the two of them easily escaped , performed the robbery , and returned to their cells before being noticed . 
 After the two magicians make their exit , confident in the lack of evidence against them , Mulder reveals to Scully the true trick being performed — that everything involving Alvarez was purely misdirection . Earlier , when checking whether Pinchbeck had stolen funds from the bank , the manager had told Mulder they would need his badge number and thumb print to gain access to the Electronic Fund Transfer ( <unk> ) system . Mulder shows Scully Maleeni 's wallet , which he had collected from evidence before confronting him and LaBonge . When the agents first met LaBonge , he had surreptitiously <unk> their badges as an example of his skill with sleight of hand , which gave him Mulder 's badge number . Upon their first meeting with Pinchbeck impersonating his brother , Pinchbeck did a card trick with Mulder , leaving Mulder 's prints on the card , which as Mulder displays , is securely in Maleeni 's wallet . Mulder explains that the pair purposely acted in a high profile manner to draw the attention of the FBI , and that if they had collected the badge number and thumbprint , they would have been able to perform <unk> . As Mulder and Scully leave the jail , Scully shows that she , too , has learned a trick , and turns her hand around 360 degrees in a similar fashion as LaBonge had done with his hand before . Mulder asks Scully to explain how , and she brushes him off , saying simply " magic " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The idea behind " The Amazing Maleeni " started with executive producer Frank Spotnitz . When pitching ideas for the seventh season episodes , Spotnitz wanted an episode to deal solely on " magic and illusion " and have nothing to do with the paranormal . Spotnitz had been petitioning the writers of The X @-@ Files for a magic @-@ based episode since season two , but nothing ever came to light . Eventually , during the seventh season , Vince Gilligan was assigned to write the episode , something he described as " agony " . Gilligan explained , " The episode started with Frank , because he — for several years — had wanted to write an episode about magicians . Frank was a fan of the TV show The Magician with Bill Bixby so I believe that was part of it , but Frank was interested in the idea of magic and the idea of fooling people who wished to be fooled . " 
 Spotnitz 's favorite magician was Ricky Jay , and so , for the episode , Jay was brought in to play the part of The Amazing Maleeni . Initially , however , the episode hit a snag . The production crew discovered that Jay 's production agency had not been informed and that he would be unable to guest star in the episode . The staff 's back @-@ up magician , David Blaine , was unavailable for shooting as well . Series creator Chris Carter , however , later stated that the show would not take no for an answer : " We got on the phone with him . He agreed to come to our offices to talk about the script and ended up doing some card tricks for us that reduced Frank and I to being six @-@ year @-@ olds again . " Jay eventually agreed to do the part , but requested that he only do the tricks he was accustomed to doing . Thus , many of Jay 's trademark tricks were included in the episode 's script . Gilligan , in retrospect , later noted , " There was no choice other than Ricky Jay as far as we were concerned . He was not looking forward to the idea of playing a magician because I think he felt that magicians were never portrayed very realistically in movies or television shows . " 
 The cast and crew of the episode enjoyed the " amusement park " feel of the story . Gillian Anderson later noted , " Because of all the magic , I was constantly being entertained . The difficulty with something like this is you have tendency to forget that people are still having bad things happen to them . " Anderson later stated that , because many of the lines were written in a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek style , she and David Duchovny said them in a humorous style ; the two had to keep reminding themselves that the story revolved around a murder . 
 = = = Special effects = = = 
 The episode used several special effects . However , in order to ensure that the episode felt " camera @-@ real " to preserve the theme of magic and illusions , many of the more intense effects were replaced with more conventional effects . For instance , the scene wherein Bill LaBonge 's hand erupted into flames was created through the use of stunt man , rather than through expensive and , ultimately , " less convincing " CGI effects . The scene featuring The Amazing Maleeni turning his head 360 degrees was created using a prosthetic head , courtesy of John Vulich 's Optic Nerve Studios . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Amazing Maleeni " first aired in the United States on January 16 , 2000 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 4 , with a 14 share , meaning that roughly 9 @.@ 4 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 14 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 16 @.@ 18 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on May 7 , 2000 and received 0 @.@ 79 million viewers , making it the fourth most watched episode that week . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Kenneth Silber from Space.com was critical of the episode 's intricacy , writing , " ' The Amazing Maleeni ' is a convoluted episode that ultimately lacks verve and excitement . Even if one can figure out what is going on , there remains the question of how much , or even whether , to care . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated it two stars out of five . The two noted that , had the episode used real magic tricks instead of " resort [ ing ] to CGI , the episode would have been much more than a simple " cheat " . Furthermore , Shearman and Pearson criticized the fact that the explanation behind Maleeni turning his head around 360 degrees was never satisfactorily explained . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a mixed review and awarded it two stars out of four . Vitaris compared the episode 's plot to the 1999 movie Arlington Road , noting that while " the scheme is fun to watch while it unfolds , [ … ] in the end , it 's not credible ; too much is left open to chance for it really to happen . " 
 Not all reviews were so critical . Rich Rosell from Digitally Obsessed awarded the episode 4 out of 5 stars . Although he noted that the episode was " not Gilligan 's best work " and that the writing was " a little spotty " , he said " the vibe [ of ' The Amazing Maleeni ' ] is very well done . " Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , gave the episode a moderately positive review , writing " My heart wasn 't racing and I wasn 't sitting on the edge of my seat as Mulder and Scully unmasked our two magicians [ … ] But it was fun to put the clues together to see what it all added up to . " Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B + " and wrote that he " love [ d ] it " . He praised the episode 's " good @-@ <unk> " , which he felt was due to Mulder and Scully 's interaction . Handlen also enjoyed the writing , noting that the " script also does a good job at doling out its secrets in a way that never makes either the magicians or our heroes come off as idiots " . Paul Spragg of Xposé wrote positively of the episode , describing it as a " rather fun tale " . 
 = Billy Joe Tolliver = 
 Billy Joe Tolliver ( born February 7 , 1966 ) is a former American football quarterback who played in the National Football League ( NFL ) and Canadian Football League ( CFL ) for twelve seasons . He played for the San Diego Chargers , Atlanta Falcons , Houston Oilers , Shreveport Pirates , Kansas City Chiefs , and New Orleans Saints . Over the course of his career , he played in 79 games , completed 891 of 1 @,@ 707 passes for 10 @,@ 760 yards , threw 59 touchdowns and 64 interceptions , and retired with a passer rating of 67 @.@ 7 . 
 A graduate of Boyd High School and Texas Tech University , Tolliver was selected 51st in the 1989 NFL Draft by the San Diego Chargers . He started 19 games in two seasons at San Diego before being traded to Atlanta , where he saw playing time as a backup for three seasons . In 1994 , he became one of three starting quarterbacks for Houston and then served as quarterback of the Shreveport Pirates in the CFL during their final season of activity in 1995 . After not competing in 1996 , Tolliver played for both Atlanta and Kansas City in 1997 . He then started 11 games for New Orleans in two seasons but did not take the field in 2000 . A stint with Green Bay in the 2001 offseason concluded his professional career . 
 = = High school and college = = 
 Descended from the Anglo @-@ Italian Taliaferro colonists in 17th @-@ century Virginia , Tolliver was born in Boyd , Texas , where he attended local schools . He played high school football at Boyd High School . During his senior season , he led the Boyd Yellow Jackets to a 15 – 0 – 1 record and the 2 – A state championship . He amassed more than 1 @,@ 000 rushing and passing yards and was named Player of the Year by the Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram . Tolliver was a three – sport athlete in high school , averaging 15 points and 17 rebounds in basketball and throwing 14 no @-@ hitters in baseball . 
 After graduating from high school , Tolliver played college football at Texas Tech University and was a member of the Delta Tau Delta Fraternity . His hard throwing style led Texas Tech head coach David McWilliams to say , " He throws the ball harder , and with more velocity , than anyone I 've ever seen . " He redshirted his freshman season in 1984 and became the starting quarterback in 1985 . On November 9 , 1985 , Tolliver had his first breakout performance at Texas Tech as he threw for a record @-@ setting 422 yards and five touchdowns in a 63 – 7 win over Texas Christian University ( TCU ) , a feat that helped him become a household name in Texas . As he began his sophomore season , he was considered the lone bright spot on Texas Tech 's offense . Tolliver struggled at the start of the year ; by the end of September he had only completed 54 of 123 passes . After throwing five interceptions in a game against Baylor , he shrugged off the bad game , saying , " even Betty Crocker burns a cake every now and then . " His fortunes continued to sink when in a game in late October against the Rice Owls , he was benched and backup quarterback Monte McGuire rallied the team to a victory . However , Tolliver regained his starting job and brought his team to the 1986 Independence Bowl as Texas Tech won six games for the first time since 1978 . He finished the season with 1 @,@ 802 passing yards and seven touchdowns . 
 Tolliver began his junior year facing Florida State , a game where he suffered a hairline fracture in his foot , leaving him doubtful for the match . He missed the first three games of the season but returned in Texas Tech 's fourth game against Baylor , completing 14 of 25 passes for 189 yards , a touchdown and an interception in a 36 – 22 loss . Tolliver 's next big performance came against TCU , the same team he defeated 63 – 7 as a freshman . He threw a touchdown pass to Wayne Walker in the last minute to beat TCU , 36 – 35 . He finished the season having passed for 1 @,@ 422 yards and seven touchdowns in eight games . The next season , his senior year , Tolliver and Texas Tech sought to win the Southwest Conference . He started the season strong , throwing an 85 @-@ yard pass against Arizona — it was the third @-@ longest pass in school history — but the Red Raiders started with two losses . By the end of the season , Tolliver had set 16 school records and was awarded the Southwest Conference Sportsmanship Award by the league 's officials . After four seasons with the Texas Tech Red Raiders , he set the school record for career passing yards ( 6 @,@ 756 ) , career pass attempts ( 1 @,@ 008 ) , career pass completions ( 493 ) , career touchdown passes ( 38 ) , season passing yards in 1988 ( 2 @,@ 869 ) , and single game passing yards ( 446 ) against Oklahoma State University in 1988 . Tolliver was inducted into Texas Tech 's Hall of Honor in 2002 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = San Diego Chargers = = = 
 Tolliver was selected by the San Diego Chargers in the second round of the 1989 NFL Draft . The Chargers traded third , fourth , and seventh @-@ round picks in exchange for the New York Giants ' second @-@ round pick in order to draft him . Tolliver was signed on July 31 , 1989 , after a short holdout . He was to compete for the starting job alongside Mark Malone and David Archer , a spot which eventually went to Jim McMahon after the Chargers traded for him . As the 1989 season began with McMahon as the helm , Tolliver was slated to play the second half of the final preseason game against the Phoenix Cardinals . After 13 completions in 23 attempts , Tolliver ran the ball late in the game and broke his collarbone , sidelining him for at least six weeks . After spending the first seven games on the injured reserve list , Tolliver was taken off the list and named the starter for the game against the Seattle Seahawks on October 29 , replacing McMahon who had disappointed at quarterback . In Tolliver 's first start , he played three quarters , throwing six completed passes in 17 attempts for 41 yards and throwing an interception in a 10 – 7 loss . Tolliver subsequently lost the starting job back to McMahon . However , in late November , Tolliver was given the starting job back , remaining the starting quarterback the rest of the season . Tolliver finished the season having played five games with 89 completions in 185 attempts , 1097 yards , five touchdowns , eight interceptions , and a 57 @.@ 9 quarterback rating . 
 As the 1990 season began , McMahon was released by the team , leaving Tolliver as the starting quarterback at training camp . After training camp and a preseason in which Tolliver started and was relieved by quarterbacks Mark Vlasic and rookie John Friesz , Chargers head coach Dan Henning named Vlasic as the starting quarterback against the Dallas Cowboys in the season opener , saying that he was " steadier " than Tolliver . After a loss against Dallas , Tolliver regained his starting job during the game two against the Cincinnati Bengals . Despite some shaky performances in the following weeks , the Chargers ' coaching staff stuck by their quarterback , saying that " the last thing we need around here is more change . " Tolliver played nearly the rest of the season as the starting quarterback but was replaced by Friesz for the final game of the season against the Los Angeles Raiders . The Chargers made this move because , according to Henning , " Tolliver has to work on his shortcomings . " Tolliver finished the season having completed 216 of 410 passes , thrown for 2 @,@ 574 yards , 16 touchdowns , and 16 interceptions , and posting a QB rating of 68 @.@ 9 . 
 Although Tolliver had the confidence of Dan Henning , Chargers GM Bobby Beathard and owner Alex Spanos were unsatisfied with his production during the 1990 season , and they were looking towards Friesz as the future quarterback . Tolliver was the leading man for the starting quarterback position as training camp for the 1991 season began , with Friesz battling Bob Gagliano for the backup spot . However , after training camp ended , Friesz was named the starting quarterback for the 1991 season opener against the Pittsburgh Steelers . 
 = = = Falcons and Oilers = = = 
 Just a few days after losing the starting job , Tolliver was traded to the Atlanta Falcons for a fifth @-@ round draft pick . In Atlanta , Tolliver was the backup quarterback behind Chris Miller and alongside rookie Brett Favre , and played part of seven games throughout the season . Tolliver 's breakthrough as a Falcon came against the San Francisco 49ers on November 3 , 1991 . Miller was injured in the second quarter , and Tolliver was brought in for the rest of the game . With one second left , he threw a 44 @-@ yard Hail Mary pass to Michael Haynes , which was caught for a touchdown and sealing a 17 – 14 upset victory . Due to his performance and Miller 's injury , Tolliver was given his first start the following week against the Washington Redskins . Tolliver 's first start with the Falcons was a 56 – 17 blowout loss . Afterwards , Tolliver got his second and last start of the season against the Green Bay Packers as a result of Miller suddenly running a fever . Tolliver finished the regular season having completing 40 of 82 passes with four touchdowns , two interceptions , and a QB rating of 75 @.@ 8 . 
 After the Falcons traded Favre to the Packers , Miller and Tolliver were the only quarterbacks on the roster . Before the season started , Wade Wilson signed with the team , and the two shared the role of backup to Miller . Tolliver played two of the first eight games , then was named the starting quarterback when the Falcons lost Miller for the season as a result of reconstructive surgery on his left knee . Tolliver 's first start of the season came against the 49ers . He completed 16 of 25 passes , but threw three interceptions in a 41 – 3 loss . The next week against the Cardinals , Tolliver was benched for the final series as Wilson led the team to victory and Tolliver argued with coach Jerry Glanville . Despite the conflict and a shoulder injury , Glanville gave Tolliver the start the following week against the Buffalo Bills . He played a few more games before being replaced by Wilson for the rest of the season , partially as a result of Wilson throwing five touchdown passes in his first start en route to a 35 – 7 Falcons victory . Tolliver finished the season with five touchdowns , five interceptions , a 55 @.@ 7 % completion percentage , and a 70 @.@ 4 QB rating . 
 After the 1992 season , Tolliver was a restricted free agent . Wilson signed a contract with the Saints , and to replace him the Falcons signed Bobby Hebert . Tolliver signed a one @-@ year contract in August , after holding out for a time . Tolliver started the 1993 season as the third @-@ string quarterback behind Hebert and Miller . However , Miller re @-@ injured his left knee in late September , making Tolliver the main backup to Hebert . Tolliver made his first start against the Los Angeles Rams , but was injured in his second start against the Saints ; the Falcons signed Chris <unk> as a result of the injury . Tolliver finished the season in occasional relief for Hebert , who remained bothered by injuries . Over the course of the year , Tolliver played in seven games and threw for just under 500 yards , and became a free agent after the season ended . 
 In early September 1994 , Tolliver was signed to a contract by the Houston Oilers . He was originally the third @-@ string quarterback , but ineffectiveness by Bucky Richardson led Tolliver to relieve him in a game against the Cleveland Browns . Tolliver played well enough to be considered for the starting job the following week due to Cody Carlson dealing with injuries . Tolliver made his first start in a game against the Raiders , but played inconsistently over seven starts and was replaced by Richardson in the season finale against the New York Jets . After finishing the season , Tolliver became a free agent and left the NFL . 
 Tolliver signed a three @-@ year contract worth about $ 1 million with the Shreveport Pirates of the Canadian Football League before the 1995 season began . Early in the season , Tolliver got to compete against former teammate David Archer in the San Antonio Texans ' CFL debut . He finished the season having thrown for 3 @,@ 767 yards , 16 touchdowns , and 15 interceptions . After the team folded following a 5 – 13 season , Tolliver was again without a team . In October 1996 , Tolliver rejoined the Falcons as the third @-@ string quarterback , this time sitting behind Bobby Hebert and Browning Nagle . He spent the 1996 season on the bench , and did not take a snap in a game . He was re @-@ signed by Atlanta in April and given a one @-@ year contract worth $ 325 @,@ 000 . 
 Tolliver was slated to compete with Tommy Maddox for the backup quarterback spot at Atlanta as training camp rolled around . Halfway through August , Maddox was released , and Tolliver was made the primary backup behind Chris Chandler . Tolliver played his first NFL game since 1994 on September 7 , 1997 against the Carolina Panthers . He completed 7 of 17 passes for 79 yards . After relieving Chandler again the following week , Tolliver was slated to start the next game against the 49ers , in what became his only starting appearance of the season . He was slated to start again against the Denver Broncos , but instead came in late in the game . He was almost able to lead the Falcons to a comeback victory over the Broncos , completing six of nine passes for 85 yards and a touchdown , but he instead lost to the then @-@ undefeated Broncos as the team remained winless . When Chandler went down with an injury in late October , coach Dan Reeves chose to start Tony Graziani . Shortly afterwards , Tolliver was released by the Falcons . In early November , Kansas City Chiefs quarterback Elvis Grbac was lost for the season due to a broken collarbone . As a result , the Chiefs signed Tolliver to a two @-@ year contract as the third @-@ string quarterback to replace him . Tolliver finished the season having completed 64 passes in 116 attempts for 677 yards , five touchdowns , and one interception . Only one of the 116 attempts came as a Kansas City quarterback . The 1998 preseason began with Tolliver competing with Pat Barnes for the third @-@ string quarterback job , but this ended when Tolliver was released by the Chiefs in August . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 After Saints quarterback Billy Joe Hobert was lost for the season with a ruptured Achilles tendon , the Saints signed Tolliver to a two @-@ year deal . After four starts by Danny Wuerffel , Saints coach Mike Ditka gave Tolliver the start against the Atlanta Falcons . After starting for four weeks and having a few impressive performances , Tolliver was benched in favor of Kerry Collins , who finished the season as starting quarterback . Tolliver finished the year with one of his most statistically impressive seasons , completing 110 of 199 passes for 1 @,@ 427 yards , eight touchdowns , four interceptions , and finishing with a QB rating of 83 @.@ 1 . 
 Tolliver started the 1999 season as Hobert 's backup . Hobert started the first four games but was injured , leaving Tolliver to start against the Tennessee Titans on October 17 and the Giants the week after . Hobert started the next game , but suffered a pinched nerve in his neck , resulting in Tolliver 's third start of the season against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers . Against the 49ers , he scored the third and fourth rushing touchdowns of his career en route to a 24 – 6 win . However , the next week against the Jacksonville Jaguars , Tolliver suffered a torn MCL , and he was considered likely to miss the rest of the season . A couple of weeks later , Tolliver had bounced back from his injury by " treating himself with some WD @-@ 40 " and was named the starter in the December 12 game against the St. Louis Rams . Tolliver was again injured the following week against the Baltimore Ravens , putting an end to his season , which he finished with a 51 @.@ 9 completion percentage , 1 @,@ 916 yards , seven touchdowns , 16 interceptions , and a QB rating of 58 @.@ 9 . 
 Throughout the 1999 season , Tolliver remained a vocal supporter of coach Ditka despite the Saints ' 3 – 13 record , saying " I think he 's a heck of a football coach , a great motivator . We just got to start buying what he 's selling . " Ditka was fired by the Saints , but as training camp for the 2000 season began , Tolliver was the Saints ' backup quarterback behind Jeff Blake . On August 1 , the Saints traded for quarterback Aaron Brooks , which left Tolliver to compete for the third @-@ string spot alongside Jake Delhomme . The Saints ' roster was reduced to 53 players , and Tolliver was among those cut . When the Saints lost Jeff Blake for the season in mid @-@ November due to a dislocated foot , Tolliver was re @-@ signed by the Saints , though he did not play a game that season . In July 2001 , Tolliver was signed by the Green Bay Packers . This briefly reunited him with Brett Favre , with whom he was teammates in Atlanta . However , he was cut in the preseason when Doug Pederson won the backup job , and this stint marked the end of Tolliver 's professional career . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Tolliver was named after his uncle Joe and aunt Billie . He and his wife , Sheila , have five children , Charles , Austin , Mackenzie , Bryce , and Brody . 
 Tolliver is an avid golfer and has played many celebrity tournaments . He is a four @-@ time winner of the American Century Celebrity Golf Championship and won the $ 75 @,@ 000 Isuzu Celebrity Golf Challenge in 1996 . He is a regular competitor at the American Century Championship , the annual competition to determine the best golfers among American sports and entertainment celebrities . He won the tournament in 1996 , 2005 , 2010 ( with a new point record of 84 points ) , and 2013 and has a total of fourteen top ten finishes . 
 = Bad Blood ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Bad Blood " is the twelfth episode of the fifth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . Written by Vince Gilligan , directed by Cliff Bole , and featuring guest appearances from Luke Wilson and Patrick Renna it aired in the United States on February 22 , 1998 on the Fox network . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . The episode received a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 0 , being watched by 19 @.@ 25 million viewers . In addition , " Bad Blood " received largely positive reviews , with many critics praising the episode 's humor . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Mulder and Scully must report to their supervisor , Assistant Director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) after Mulder kills a young man he believes to be a vampire . After each recollecting their takes on the event , they realize that they have very different memories of the investigation . 
 " Bad Blood " was inspired by an episode of The Dick Van Dyke Show wherein the main characters tell different versions of a fight they have had . According to critical analysis of the episode , " Bad Blood " explores the dynamics of the relationship between Mulder and Scully . In addition , some scholars argue that by Scully telling the tale from a perspective opposed to Mulder 's , the episode subverts the male gaze ( a feminist concept arguing that films tend to cater to male viewers and perspectives ) . The episode 's makeup and special effect coordinators used various techniques to create many of the effects seen in the episode , such as the vampire teeth , the glowing eyes , and the bite marks . 
 = = Plot = = 
 One night , FBI Special Agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) kills a young man , who Mulder believes is a vampire but has pointed dentures instead of actual fangs . Afterwards , he and his FBI partner , Special Agent Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) must report to their supervisor , Assistant Director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) . Before they do so , they attempt to get their stories straight . 
 Scully tells her version of the story via a flashback to the previous day . She arrives at work and Mulder tells her about a murder in Texas , which he believes to be the work of vampires . In her version , Mulder is exuberant , insensitive , and irritating , while she is calm and mindful of her thoughts . The agents travel to the small town of Cheney , Texas where they meet Sheriff Hartwell ( Luke Wilson ) , whom Scully finds highly charming . Mulder and Hartwell leave to investigate further while Scully autopsies the body . She discovers that the victim , whose last meal had been pizza , was incapacitated with chloral hydrate . She returns to the motel room and orders a pizza , but Mulder soon appears and sends her back to autopsy another body . She leaves him just as her food is delivered . When she finds that the second victim had also ingested chloral hydrate in a pizza , she realizes Mulder is in danger and returns to the motel room . She finds him about to be attacked by the pizza delivery boy , Ronnie Strickland ( Patrick Renna ) . She shoots at Ronnie , who runs off into the woods . When she catches up to him , Mulder has gotten there first and hammered a stake into Ronnie 's heart . 
 Mulder tells Scully his version . In his recollection , he is sensitive and polite to Scully , while she is dismissive and irritable , and clearly enamored with Sheriff Hartwell ( who , in Mulder 's version , is far less refined and has obvious buck teeth ) . While Scully is performing the autopsy , Mulder and Hartwell get a call to go to the local RV park , where there is " a situation " . They find another dead body , apparently a victim of the same attacker . Mulder returns to the motel room ; after Scully has left , he eats her pizza and realizes that he has been drugged . Ronnie enters , with glowing green eyes , and prepares to attack Mulder , but Mulder manages to postpone his demise by scattering sunflower seeds all over the floor , which Ronnie compulsively starts to pick up . Scully enters and shoots Ronnie , but the bullets have no effect , and Ronnie runs out with Scully in pursuit . Mulder recovers from being drugged and chases after Ronnie . 
 Back in the office , Scully says that no one will believe his story given their diverging statements and the fact that Ronnie was apparently a human . Meanwhile , a Texas coroner prepares to perform an autopsy on Ronnie 's body . When he removes the stake , Ronnie wakes up and escapes . Skinner sends Mulder and Scully back to Texas to investigate . Scully stakes out the cemetery with Sheriff Hartwell , while Mulder goes to the RV park . As they wait , Sheriff Hartwell gives Scully a hot drink , apologizes to her on behalf of Ronnie , and says that he makes them all look bad . He makes it clear that he too is a vampire and Scully realizes she has been drugged . Before she loses consciousness , she sees Sheriff Hartwell 's eyes turning green . 
 At the RV park , Mulder finds Ronnie . As he tries to arrest him , Mulder is surrounded and overwhelmed by a group of people with glowing green eyes . He wakes up the next morning in the RV park , in his car , where he is rejoined by Scully . They are both unharmed and the vampires have disappeared . Back in Washington , they give Skinner their unified report . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and filming = = = 
 " Bad Blood " was written by Vince Gilligan , who had already written a number of episodes for the series ; this was his fifth writing credit of the season . Aware that he had an episode to be filmed soon after the Christmas period of 1997 , he had been working on a script that would involve a story being presented by Robert Stack of Unsolved Mysteries , with unknown actors playing Mulder and Scully . Under pressure to complete the script , Gilligan decided his idea would not work . He said , " I just couldn 't figure out how to do it " . The series would later explore the idea of an X @-@ Files crossover in the guise of non @-@ fiction with the seventh season episode " X @-@ Cops " , also penned by Gilligan . 
 With the help of co @-@ executive producer Frank Spotnitz , he came up with a new idea . Spotnitz was inspired by an episode of The Dick Van Dyke Show , called " The Night the Roof Fell In " , in which the characters of Rob and Laura Petrie tell different versions of a fight they have had . Gilligan said of the idea , " I just thought it was a cool way to tell a story . " With two versions of the same story taking up much of the episode , Gilligan knew that he would have to keep the plot simple and settled on a vampire story , that everyone would easily understand . Both Mulder and Scully 's version of the episode were filmed back to back , utilizing the " exact same sets and camera angles " . The RV park that was featured in the episode was formerly the site of a sawmill that had previously been used in the fourth season episode " Gethsemane " that had burned down . 
 = = = Casting and effects = = = 
 Luke Wilson guest starred as Sheriff Hartwell ; he had previously worked on 1998 comedy film Home Fries , which had been scripted by Vince Gilligan . Former child actor Patrick Renna played Ronnie Strickland . He said of the part , " before we started I asked if Ronnie was pretending to be a moron . They told me , ' No . He 's really just a moron . ' " 
 The out of control RV was created by the show 's special effects coordinator , David Gauthier ; an auxiliary steering wheel was rigged up in the vehicle so that the driver would be able to steer the car from the back window , out of the camera 's sight . Wilson and Renna were fitted with faux vampire teeth – which were sardonically labeled " funny fangs " — courtesy of special effects makeup coordinator Toby Lindala . Wilson later recounted that they fit comfortably in the actor 's mouth , musing that " the retainers I had to wear as a kid never fit as well . " In order to create the glowing green eyes , fluorescent material was glued to the actors ' eyelids . However , because they were unable to see , this gave the vampires a " somewhat vacant " stare . The various corpses with fangs marks were created by makeup artist Laverne Basham . In order to create a suitable model , Gilligan bit the back of his hand to give Basham something to work with . 
 = = Themes = = 
 According to Susanne Kord and Elisabeth <unk> , " Bad Blood " explores the dynamics of the relationship between Mulder and Scully by " develop [ ing ] the dysfunctional potential of [ their ] routine interactions . " In " Scully Hits the Glass Ceiling : Postmodernism , <unk> , <unk> and The X @-@ Files " , Linda Badley suggests that The X @-@ Files often subverts the concept of the male gaze through the whole series and " Bad Blood " includes an example of this , allowing Scully to be the one that gazes at Sheriff Hartwell . 
 Michelle Bush , in her book Myth @-@ X , described the episode as allowing the viewer " a peek inside [ Mulder and Scully 's ] heads " by showing how they see themselves and each other , as well as " their insecurities about their attractiveness to the other " . The title " Bad Blood " can be applied to the tension between the two characters in the episode . She described how in each of their stories they try to describe themselves in the way the other would find attractive . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Bad Blood " was first broadcast in the United States on February 22 , 1998 , on the Fox network . In its original broadcast , it was watched by 19 @.@ 25 million viewers , according to the Nielsen ratings system . It received a 12 @.@ 0 rating / 17 share among viewers meaning that 12 @.@ 0 percent of all households in the United States , and 17 percent of all people watching television at the time , viewed the episode . The episode was one of eight featured on Revelations , a DVD released prior to the release of the 2008 movie , The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Bad Blood " received largely positive reviews from critics . In a 2000 review of season five for the New Straits Times , Francis Dass called the episode " an absolute gem . The most hilarious X @-@ Files episode I have ever seen . " Rebecca Traister of Salon.com called it " possibly the best X @-@ Files episode of all time " . In a 2008 review of the Revelations DVD , which contained " Bad Blood " , Erik Henriksen of The Portland Mercury praised the way the writers " managed to tweak their genre formulas " and said of the episode , " It 's witty and quick and features a great performance from Luke Wilson " . In a review of Revelations for the Reading Eagle , Gina McIntyre called the episode " a hilarious riff on how [ Mulder and Scully ] view each other " . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club wrote a positive review of what he described as one of his " top five favorite X @-@ Files " . He called the script " very smart " and compared the story to the plot of Rashomon . He said " Yes , ' Bad Blood ' can be goofy , but it 's a good kind of goofy , the kind that pokes holes in characters in ways that just make them more lovable . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode five stars out of five and wrote " Now that 's how you tell a vampire story ! " The two praised Gilligan 's use of humor as well as the episode 's examination of both Mulder and Scully 's differing points of views . Shearman and Pearson noted that " the gimmick here isn 't supernatural , but structural " , and called the episode 's framing device " subtly done " , which resulted in its " brilliance " . Review website IGN named it the eighth best standalone X @-@ Files episode of the entire series . Rob Bricken from Topless Robot named " Bad Blood " the funniest X @-@ Files episode . An article in The Montreal Gazette listed " Bad Blood " as the ninth best stand @-@ alone episode of the series . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files , named the episode one of the " Top 25 Episode of All Time " of The X @-@ Files , ranking it at number 19 . He called the episode " a satiric X @-@ File at is finest . " Den of Geek writer Juliette Harrisson named it the " finest " stand @-@ alone episode of season 5 and wrote , " for sheer fun and narrative playfulness , the winner has to be Bad Blood " . 
 Not all reviews were so glowing . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a more mixed review and awarded it two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Although she enjoyed the comedic elements of the episode , she was somewhat critical of the underlying issues , most notably the way Mulder and Scully viewed each other in the episode . She wrote that , " their relationship seems to be a strangely passive @-@ aggressive one " . Vitaris also was critical of the fact that Mulder was not guilty over the fact that he may have killed an innocent boy . 
 Gillian Anderson has described " Bad Blood " as one of her favorites of the series , commenting " Oh , yes ! I loved that episode . As far as I 'm concerned it 's one of our best ever . I think it really showed how well David and I can work together " . 
 = Oliver Typewriter Company = 
 The Oliver Typewriter Company was an American typewriter manufacturer headquartered in Chicago , Illinois . The Oliver Typewriter was the first effective " visible print " typewriter , meaning text was visible to the typist as it was entered . It was however preceded by the Daugherty typewriter , which was also an effective visible typewriter . Oliver typewriters were marketed heavily for home use , utilizing local distributors and sales on credit . Oliver produced more than one million machines between 1895 and 1928 and licensed its designs to several international firms . 
 Competitive pressure and financial troubles resulted in the company 's liquidation in 1928 . The company ’ s assets were purchased by investors who formed The British Oliver Typewriter Company , which manufactured and licensed the machines until its own closure in the late 1950s . The last Oliver typewriter was produced in 1959 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Thomas Oliver = = = 
 Thomas Oliver was born in Woodstock , Ontario , Canada , on August 1 , 1852 . Having become interested in religion , Oliver moved to Monticello , Iowa , after the death of his mother , to serve as a Methodist minister . In 1888 , Oliver began to develop his first typewriter , made from strips of tin cans , as a means of producing more legible sermons . He was awarded his first typewriter patent , US Patent No. 450 @,@ 107 , on April 7 , 1891 . After four years of development , a " crude working model " composed of 500 parts had been produced . Oliver resigned his ministry and moved to Epworth , Iowa , where he found investors willing to provide $ 15 @,@ 000 ( $ 427 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) of capital , and leased a building in which to manufacture his machines . 
 While visiting Chicago to promote the machine , Oliver encountered businessman Delavan Smith , who became interested in the typewriter and bought the stock held by the Iowa investors . Oliver was given a 65 % interest in the company and retained to continue development of the typewriter , at an annual salary of $ 3 @,@ 000 ( $ 85 @,@ 000 per year in 2016 ) . Oliver died suddenly of heart disease on February 9 , 1909 , aged 56 . 
 = = = Illinois years = = = 
 The Oliver Typewriter Company had begun operating in 1895 , with its headquarters on the ninth floor of a building on the corner of Clark and Randolph Street in Chicago . In 1896 , manufacturing moved from Iowa to Woodstock , Illinois , when the City of Woodstock donated a vacant factory once used by the Wheeler and Tappan Company on the condition that the Oliver Typewriter Company remain there at least five years . Manufacturing was divided into six departments : type bar , carriage , assembly , <unk> and adjustment , inspection , and an aligning room . The company 's headquarters moved to the Oliver Building , now a Chicago landmark on the National Register of Historic Places , when it was completed in 1907 . 
 Starting in 1899 , the company established sales networks by encouraging customers to become local distributors . This method of marketing relied on word of mouth and emphasized sales made directly to neighbors ( door @-@ to @-@ door ) and , after 1905 , sales on credit . In response to increased competition in the late 1910s , however , the company eliminated its network of local salesman and used the resulting savings in commissions to reduce the typewriter 's $ 100 ( $ 1 @,@ 400 in 2016 ) price by half . Sales increased and , at its peak , the company 's labor force of 875 was producing 375 machines daily . 
 In addition to its offices in Illinois , the company had branch offices in Baltimore , Buffalo , Cleveland , Kansas City , Minneapolis , New York City , Omaha , St. Louis , San Francisco and Seattle , all of which closed when Oliver shifted to mail order sales in March 1917 . A minor recession in 1921 – 22 caused a large number of customers to default on their payments , resulting in the repossession of their typewriters . The company opted not to borrow money and , in 1926 , the board of directors voted to liquidate the company . Only one employee , Chester Nelson , was retained to oversee the company 's liquidation . 
 = = = British Oliver Typewriter Company = = = 
 In 1928 , the Oliver Typewriter Company was sold to investors who formed the British Oliver Typewriter Company in Croydon , England . Production of Oliver ’ s original , three @-@ rowed keyboard design was discontinued in 1931 when the company began to produce a rebranded model of the " Fortuna " typewriter , a four @-@ rowed German design . In 1935 , the company began to produce the Halda @-@ Norden standard typewriter , another licensed design , as model No. 20 . The company , however , had to retool its machines and return to the original Oliver design when the British government placed large orders for the three @-@ rowed No. 15 at the outbreak of World War II . 
 Production of the No. 20 resumed around 1947 , at which time the company began to license the Oliver name to several European manufacturing companies . The standard desktop machine was eventually discontinued in favor of portable models ; the company began to sell a German design , the <unk> Standard , as the Oliver standard . In 1958 , Oliver purchased the Byron Typewriter Company , previously the <unk> Typewriter Company , of Nottingham . The licensing ventures were ultimately unsuccessful , and the company 's machine tools were transferred to a factory in Germany . Production of all Oliver typewriters ended in May 1959 . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The general design of Oliver typewriters remained mostly unchanged throughout the company 's history . The Olivers are " down strike " typewriters , meaning the typebars strike the platen ( also known as the roller ) from above , rather than from below ( " up strike " ) or from the front ( " front strike " ) . Unlike the " up strike " method , which prints text out of sight on the underside of the platen , the " down strike " is a " visible print " design , meaning the full page is visible to the typist as the text is being entered . The relatively greater striking power of the " down strike " design led Olivers to be preferred for specialty uses such as stencil cutting or " <unk> " ( copying using carbon paper ) . The " front strike " method , a competing " visible print " design , was patented around the same time ( 1889 – 91 ) , but an effective machine that did not interfere with the typist ’ s line of sight was not available until 1897 when , roughly three years after the introduction of the Oliver No. 1 , the Underwood No. 1 appeared on the market . 
 The Oliver ’ s typebars are bent in a bow ( forming an inverted " U " shape ) and rest in " towers " on the sides of the typewriter . This design limited the machine to a three @-@ row QWERTY keyboard as the typebars were stacked such that they grew progressively larger as more were added . The size and usability implications of adding additional keys and thus , more typebars , precluded the addition of a fourth keyboard row dedicated to numbers . Although a four @-@ row prototype was designed in 1922 , it was shelved due to the company ’ s financial troubles at that time . The No. 20 , No. 21 and portable models produced by the British Oliver Typewriter Company had four @-@ row keyboards . 
 = = = Color = = = 
 Oliver typewriters were finished with olive green paint or nickel @-@ plating and white or black keyboards , depending on customer preference . Beginning with model No. 3 , machines were painted green except some variants to be exported to warm or damp regions , which were chrome @-@ plated . The color was changed from green to black on the introduction of model No. 11 . Oliver typewriters made for the British war effort were supplied with a " war finish " . 
 = = = Models = = = 
 = = = = United States = = = = 
 The following models were produced in the United States between 1894 and 1928 : 
 With the exception of model No. 2 , even @-@ numbered models were produced with extra keys ( 32 versus 28 keys ) for sale in countries with accented languages . 
 = = = = United Kingdom = = = = 
 The following models were produced by the British Oliver Typewriter Company between 1930 and 1942 : 
 = = = = International = = = = 
 Oliver typewriter designs were licensed for production in several countries . Variants of model No. 3 were produced by The Linotype Company of Montreal and A. Greger & Co. of Vienna . Models produced by licensees were marketed under various names including " Courier " ( Austria ) , " Fiver " ( Germany ) , " Stolzenberg " ( continental Europe ) and " <unk> " ( Argentina ) . The Argentinian licensee used <unk> , Oliver backwards , to avoid royalty payments on the Oliver name , which had already been registered in Argentina . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 563 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 563 ( PA 563 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania . The route runs 21 @.@ 1 mi ( 33 @.@ 96 km ) from PA 63 in Upper Salford Township northeast to PA 412 in Nockamixon Township . The road runs through mostly rural areas in the northern parts of Montgomery and Bucks counties . Along the way , the route passes through the northern part of Perkasie and forms a concurrency with PA 313 in East Rockhill Township . North of here , PA 563 runs through Nockamixon State Park , running to the north of Lake Nockamixon . 
 PA 563 was first created in 1928 to connect Bergey to Harrow , following its current alignment to PA 313 before continuing straight along Ridge Road and continuing to PA 412 . By 1940 , construction of the road into a state highway was completed . In the early 1970s , PA 563 was moved to its current alignment north of PA 313 as a result of the creation of Lake Nockamixon , which severed the original alignment . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 563 begins at an intersection with PA 63 in Upper Salford Township , Montgomery County and heads in an easterly direction on two @-@ lane , undivided Ridge Road . The route passes through wooded areas with some homes , turning southeast at the Township Line Road intersection and forming the border between Salford Township to the northeast and Upper Salford Township to the southwest . PA 563 makes a northeast turn at the <unk> Road – Moyer Road junction , continuing northeast on Ridge Road into Salford Township . 
 The road passes over the Northeast Extension of the Pennsylvania Turnpike ( I @-@ 476 ) and PA 563 turns east and heads into the community of Tylersport , where it crosses Allentown Road . After leaving Tylersport , the route heads northeast into more rural areas . 
 Upon crossing County Line Road , PA 563 enters West Rockhill Township in Bucks County and heads into a mix of farms and woods . After running to the southeast of James Memorial Park , the route intersects Lawn Avenue , which provides access to the PA 309 freeway at an interchange . PA 563 passes over the freeway a short distance after this intersection . The route continues east @-@ northeast and crosses Bethlehem Pike and Old Bethlehem Pike in a commercial area . A short distance past the intersection with the latter , the road crosses into Perkasie and passes near residential neighborhoods , running along the top of a ridge . Farther to the northeast , PA 563 passes to the southeast of <unk> Airport . At this point , the road continues into East Rockhill Township and heads through a mix of farmland , woodland , and a few residences . 
 PA 563 comes to an intersection with PA 313 , where it turns northwest to form a concurrency with that route on Dublin Pike , with Ridge Road continuing northeast . The two routes head through more rural land before PA 563 splits from PA 313 by turning northeast onto Mountain View Drive . Along this road , the route heads into forested areas with occasional homes and enters Nockamixon State Park , a park which contains Lake Nockamixon . Upon crossing the <unk> Creek , the road continues into Haycock Township . In this area , PA 563 skits along the northwest edge of the state park . A short distance following the <unk> Lane intersection , the road passes the main entrance to the park . PA 563 crosses an arm of the lake into Nockamixon Township . In this township , the route leaves the state park and passes through rural areas before ending at PA 412 . 
 = = History = = 
 When Pennsylvania first legislated routes in 1911 , present @-@ day PA 563 was not given a number . In 1928 , PA 563 was designated to run from PA 63 near Bergey northeast to PA 412 near Harrow , following its current alignment south of PA 313 . From this point , it continued northeast on Ridge Road , passing near Weisel and eventually continuing northeast to Harrow . At this time , the route was unpaved . By 1930 , the route was paved south of PA 313 . At this time , the sections of the route between Tylersport and southwest of Perkasie and north of PA 313 were under construction as state highways . All of PA 563 was completed by 1940 . 
 In the 1960s , construction began to create Lake Nockamixon along the <unk> Creek near PA 563 in northern Bucks County . The Secretary of the Pennsylvania Department of Forests and Waters , Maurice K. Goddard , proposed the lake as part of a goal for every Pennsylvania resident to be within 25 miles ( 40 km ) of a state park . Lake Nockamixon was intended to fill a gap in between the Philadelphia and Lehigh Valley areas . As a result of building the dam and creating the lake , the northernmost portion of PA 563 had to be relocated to a new alignment to the north of the planned lake as it would sever a portion of the route north of <unk> Church . Between 1970 and 1972 , construction took place on the new alignment of the route . As a result , PA 563 was routed to follow PA 313 to get from Ridge Road to its new alignment . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Witold Lutosławski = 
 Witold Roman Lutosławski ( Polish : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 25 January 1913 – 7 February 1994 ) was a Polish composer and orchestral conductor . He is one of the major European composers of the 20th century , and one of the preeminent Polish musicians during his last three decades . He earned many international awards and prizes . His compositions ( of which he was a notable conductor ) include four symphonies , a Concerto for Orchestra , a string quartet , instrumental works , concertos , and orchestral song cycles . 
 During his youth , Lutosławski studied piano and composition in Warsaw . His early works were influenced by Polish folk music . His style demonstrates a wide range of rich atmospheric textures . He began developing his own characteristic composition techniques in the late 1950s . His music from this period onwards incorporates his own methods of building harmonies from small groups of musical intervals . It also uses aleatoric processes , in which the rhythmic coordination of parts is subject to an element of chance . 
 During World War II , after escaping German capture , Lutosławski made a living by playing the piano in Warsaw bars . After the war , Stalinist authorities banned his First Symphony for being " formalist " — allegedly accessible only to an elite . Lutosławski believed such anti @-@ formalism was an unjustified retrograde step , and he resolutely strove to maintain his artistic integrity . In the 1980s , Lutosławski gave artistic support to the Solidarity movement . Near the end of his life , he was awarded the Order of the White Eagle , Poland 's highest honour . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Lutosławski 's parents were both born into the Polish landed nobility . His family owned estates in the area of Drozdowo . His father Józef was involved in the Polish National Democratic Party ( " Endecja " ) , and the Lutosławski family became intimate with its founder , Roman Dmowski ( Witold Lutosławski 's middle name was Roman ) . Józef Lutosławski studied in Zürich , where in 1904 he met and married a fellow student , Maria <unk> , who later became Lutosławski 's mother . Józef pursued his studies in London , where he acted as correspondent for the National @-@ Democratic newspaper , <unk> . He continued to be involved in National Democracy politics after returning to Warsaw in 1905 , and took over the management of the family estates in 1908 . Witold Roman Lutosławski , the youngest of three brothers , was born in Warsaw shortly before the outbreak of World War I. In 1915 , with Russia at war with Germany , Prussian forces drove towards Warsaw . The <unk> travelled east to Moscow , where Józef remained politically active , organising Polish Legions ready for any action that might liberate Poland ( which was divided according to the 1815 Congress of Vienna — Warsaw was part of Tsarist Russia ) . Dmowski 's strategy was for Russia to guarantee security for a new Polish state . However , in 1917 , the February Revolution forced the Tsar to abdicate , and the October Revolution started a new Soviet government that made peace with Germany . Józef 's activities were now in conflict with the Bolsheviks , who arrested him and his brother Marian . Thus , although fighting stopped on the Eastern Front in 1917 , the <unk> were prevented from returning home . The brothers were interned in <unk> prison in central Moscow , where Lutosławski — by then aged five — visited his father . Józef and Marian were executed by a firing squad in September 1918 , some days before their scheduled trial . 
 After the war , the family returned to the newly independent Poland , only to find their estates ruined . After his father 's death , other members of the family played an important part in his early life , especially Józef 's half @-@ brother Kazimierz Lutosławski – priest and politician . 
 Lutosławski started piano lessons in Warsaw for two years from the age of six . After the Polish @-@ Soviet War the family left Warsaw to return to Drozdowo , but after a few years of running the estates with limited success , his mother returned to Warsaw . She worked as a physician , and translated books for children from English . In 1924 Lutosławski entered secondary school ( Stefan Batory Gymnasium ) while continuing piano lessons . A performance of Karol Szymanowski 's Third Symphony deeply affected him . In 1925 he started violin lessons at the Warsaw Music School . In 1931 he enrolled at Warsaw University to study mathematics , and in 1932 he formally joined the composition classes at the Conservatory . His only composition teacher was Witold Maliszewski , a renowned Polish composer who had been a pupil of Nikolai Rimsky @-@ Korsakov . Lutosławski was given a strong grounding in musical structures , particularly movements in sonata form . In 1932 he gave up the violin , and in 1933 he discontinued his mathematics studies to concentrate on the piano and composition . As a student of Jerzy <unk> , he gained a diploma for piano performance from the Conservatory in 1936 , after presenting a virtuoso program including Schumann 's Toccata and Beethoven 's fourth piano concerto . His diploma for composition was awarded by the same institution in 1937 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
