 Military service followed — Lutosławski was trained in signalling and radio operating in <unk> near Warsaw . He completed his Symphonic Variations in 1939 , and the work was premiered by the Polish Radio Symphony Orchestra conducted by Grzegorz <unk> , and this performance was broadcast on radio on 9 March 1939 . Like most young Polish composers , Lutosławski wanted to continue his education in Paris . His plans for further musical study were dashed in September 1939 , when Germany invaded western Poland and Russia invaded eastern Poland . Lutosławski was mobilised with the radio unit for the Kraków Army . He was soon captured by German soldiers , but he escaped while being marched to prison camp , and walked 250 miles ( 400 km ) back to Warsaw . Lutosławski 's brother was captured by Russian soldiers , and later died in a Siberian labour camp . 
 To earn a living , Lutosławski joined as an arranger @-@ pianist " Dana Ensemble " , the first Polish revellers , singing in " <unk> Cafe " . Then he formed a piano duo with friend and fellow composer Andrzej Panufnik , and they performed together in Warsaw cafés . Their repertoire consisted of a wide range of music in their own arrangements , including the first incarnation of Lutosławski 's Paganini Variations , a highly original transcription of the 24th Caprice for solo violin by Niccolò Paganini . <unk> , they even sometimes played Polish music ( the Nazis banned Polish music in Poland — including Chopin ) , and composed Resistance songs . Listening in cafés was the only way in which the Poles of German @-@ occupied Warsaw could hear live music ; putting on concerts was impossible since the Germans occupying Poland prohibited any organised gatherings . In café Aria , where they played , Lutosławski met his future wife Maria Danuta <unk> , a sister of the writer Stanisław <unk> . 
 Lutosławski left Warsaw in July 1944 with his mother , merely a few days before the Warsaw Uprising , salvaging only a few scores and sketches — the rest of his music was lost during the complete destruction of the city by Germans after the fall of uprising , as were the family 's Drozdowo estates . Of the 200 or so arrangements that Lutosławski and Panufnik had worked on for their piano duo , only Lutosławski 's Paganini Variations survived . Lutosławski returned to the ruins of Warsaw after the Polish @-@ Soviet treaty in April 1945 . 
 = = = Post @-@ war years = = = 
 During the postwar years , Lutosławski worked on his first symphony — sketches of which he had salvaged from Warsaw — which he had started in 1941 and which was first performed in 1948 , conducted by <unk> . To provide for his family , he also composed music that he termed functional , such as the Warsaw Suite ( written to accompany a silent film depicting the city 's reconstruction ) , sets of Polish Carols , and the study pieces for piano , Melodie <unk> ( " Folk Melodies " ) . 
 In 1945 , Lutosławski was elected as secretary and treasurer of the newly constituted Union of Polish Composers ( ZKP — Związek <unk> Polskich ) . In 1946 , he married Danuta <unk> . The marriage was a lasting one , and Danuta 's drafting skills were of great value to the composer : she became his copyist , and she solved some of the notational challenges of his later works . 
 In 1947 , the Stalinist political climate led to the adoption and imposition by the ruling Polish United Workers ' Party of the tenets of Socialist realism , and the authorities ' condemnation of modern music which was deemed to be non @-@ conformist . This artistic censorship , which ultimately came from Stalin personally , was to some degree prevalent over the whole Eastern bloc , and was reinforced by the 1948 Zhdanov decree . By 1948 , the ZKP was taken over by musicians willing to follow the party line on musical matters , and Lutosławski resigned from the committee . He was implacably opposed to the ideas of Socialist realism . His First Symphony was proscribed as " formalist " , and he found himself shunned by the Soviet authorities , a situation that continued throughout the era of Khrushchev , Brezhnev , Andropov and Chernenko . In 1954 , the climate of musical oppression drove his friend Andrzej Panufnik to defect to the United Kingdom . Against this background , he was happy to compose pieces for which there was social need , but in 1954 this earned Lutosławski — much to the composer 's chagrin — the Prime Minister 's Prize for a set of children 's songs . He commented : " [ I ] t was for those functional compositions of mine that the authorities decorated me .... I realised that I was not writing indifferent little pieces , only to make a living , but was carrying on an artistic creative activity in the eyes of the outside world . " 
 It was his substantial and original Concerto for Orchestra of 1954 that established Lutosławski as an important composer of art music . The work , commissioned in 1950 by the conductor Witold <unk> for the newly reconstituted Warsaw Philharmonic Orchestra , earned the composer two state prizes in the following year . 
 = = = Maturity = = = 
 Stalin 's death in 1953 allowed a certain relaxation of the cultural totalitarianism in Russia and its satellite states . By 1956 , political events had led to a partial thawing of the musical climate , and the Warsaw Autumn Festival of Contemporary Music was founded . Originally intended to be a biennial festival , it has been held annually ever since 1958 ( except under Martial law in 1982 when , in protest , the ZKP refused to organise it ) . The year 1958 saw the first performance of his Musique funèbre ( in Polish , Muzyka <unk> , English <unk> Music or Music of Mourning ) , which was written to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the death of Béla Bartók , but which took the composer four years to complete ; this work brought international recognition , the annual ZKP prize and the International Rostrum of Composers prize in 1959 . This work , together with the Five songs of 1956 – 57 , saw the significant development of Lutosławski 's harmonic and contrapuntal thinking as he introduced his twelve @-@ note system , the fruits of many years of thought and experiment . He established another feature of his compositional technique , which became a Lutosławski signature , when he began introducing randomness into the exact synchronisation of various parts of the musical ensemble in Jeux vénitiens ( " Venetian games " ) . These harmonic and temporal techniques became part of every subsequent work , and integral to his style . 
 In a departure from his usually serious compositions , the years 1957 – 63 saw Lutosławski also composing light music under the pseudonym <unk> . Mostly waltzes , tangos , <unk> and slow @-@ <unk> for voice and piano , these pieces are in the genre of Polish actors ' songs . Their place in Lutosławski 's output may be seen as less incongruous given his own performances of cabaret music during the war , and in the light of his relationship by marriage to the famous Polish cabaret singer Kalina <unk> ( who was his wife 's sister @-@ in @-@ law ) . 
 In 1963 , Lutosławski fulfilled a commission for the Music Biennale Zagreb , his Trois poèmes d 'Henri Michaux for chorus and orchestra . It was the first work he had written for a commission from abroad , and brought him further international acclaim . It earned him a second State Prize for music ( Lutosławski was not cynical about the award this time ) , and Lutosławski gained an agreement for the international publication of his music with Chester Music , then part of the Hansen publishing house . His String Quartet was first performed in Stockholm in 1965 , followed the same year by the first performance of his orchestral song @-@ cycle <unk> <unk> . This shortened title was suggested by the poet Jean @-@ François <unk> , who had originally published the poems as Quatre <unk> pour la <unk> de <unk> . The song cycle is dedicated to the tenor Peter Pears , who first performed it at the 1965 Aldeburgh Festival with the composer conducting . The Aldeburgh Festival was founded and organised by Benjamin Britten , with whom the composer formed a lasting friendship . 
 Shortly after this , Lutosławski started work on his Second Symphony , which had two premieres : Pierre Boulez conducted the second movement , Direct , in 1966 , and when the first movement , <unk> , was finished in 1967 , the composer conducted a complete performance in Katowice . The Second Symphony is very different from a conventional classical symphony in structure , but Lutosławski used all of his technical innovations up to that point to build a large @-@ scale , dramatic work worthy of the name . In 1968 , the work earned Lutosławski first prize from the International Music Council 's International Rostrum of Composers , his third such award , which confirmed his growing international reputation . In 1967 Lutosławski was awarded the Sonning Award , Denmark 's highest musical honour . 
 = = = International renown = = = 
 The Second Symphony , and Livre pour <unk> and the Cello Concerto which followed , were composed during a particularly traumatic period in Lutosławski 's life . His mother died in 1967 , and the period 1967 – 70 saw a great deal of unrest in Poland . This sprang first from the suppression of the theatre production Dziady , which sparked a summer of protests ; later , in 1968 , the use of Polish troops to suppress the liberal reforms in Czechoslovakia 's Prague Spring , and the Gdańsk Shipyards strike of 1970 — which led to a violent clampdown by the authorities , both caused significant political and social tension in Poland . Lutosławski did not support the Soviet regime , and these events have been postulated as reasons for the increase in antagonistic effects in his work , particularly the Cello Concerto of 1968 – 70 for Rostropovich and the Royal Philharmonic Society . Indeed , Rostropovich 's own opposition to the Soviet regime in Russia was just coming to a head ( he shortly afterwards declared his support for the dissident Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn ) . Lutosławski himself did not hold the view that such influences had a direct effect on his music , although he acknowledged that they impinged on his creative world to some degree . In any case , the Cello Concerto was a great success , earning both Lutosławski and Rostropovich accolades . At the work 's première with the Bournemouth Symphony Orchestra , Arthur Bliss presented Rostropovich with the Royal Philharmonic Society 's gold medal . 
 In 1973 , Lutosławski attended a recital given by the baritone Dietrich Fischer @-@ Dieskau with the pianist Sviatoslav Richter in Warsaw ; he met the singer after the concert and this inspired him to write his extended orchestral song Les <unk> du sommeil ( " The spaces of sleep " ) . This work , Preludes and Fugue , Mi @-@ Parti ( a French expression that roughly translates as " divided into two equal but different parts " ) , Novelette , and a short piece for cello in honour of Paul Sacher 's seventieth birthday , occupied Lutosławski throughout the 1970s , while in the background he was working away at a projected third symphony and a concertante piece for the oboist Heinz Holliger . These latter pieces were proving difficult to complete as Lutosławski struggled to introduce greater fluency into his sound world and to reconcile tensions between the harmonic and melodic aspects of his style , and between foreground and background . The Double Concerto for oboe , harp and chamber orchestra — commissioned by Paul Sacher — was finally finished in 1980 , and the Third Symphony in 1983 . In 1977 he received the Order of the Builders of People 's Poland . In 1983 he received the Ernst von Siemens Music Prize . 
 During this period , Poland was undergoing yet more upheaval : in 1978 , John Paul II was elected Pope , providing a national figurehead of world importance ; in 1980 , the influential movement Solidarność was created , led by Lech Wałęsa ; and in 1981 , martial law was declared by General Wojciech Jaruzelski . From 1981 – 89 , Lutosławski refused all professional engagements in Poland as a gesture of solidarity with the artists ' boycott . He refused to enter the Culture Ministry to meet any of the ministers , and was careful not be photographed in their company . In 1983 , as a gesture of support , he sent a recording of the first performance ( in Chicago ) of the Third Symphony to Gdańsk to be played to strikers in a local church . In 1983 , he was awarded the Solidarity prize , of which Lutosławski was reported to be more proud than any other of his honours . 
 He also bought a house in Oslo and had a cabin in the Norwegian countryside . He and his wife would stay here several times a year to be near her son from an earlier marriage , who was a Norwegian citizen . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 Through the mid @-@ 1980s , Lutosławski composed three pieces called <unk> ( " Chain " ) , which refers to the way the music is constructed from contrasting strands which overlap like the links of a chain . Chain 2 was written for Anne @-@ Sophie Mutter ( commissioned by Paul Sacher ) , and for Mutter he also orchestrated his slightly earlier Partita for violin and piano , providing a new linking Interlude , so that when played together the Partita , Interlude and Chain 2 form his longest work . 
 The Third Symphony earned Lutosławski the first Grawemeyer Prize from the University of Louisville , Kentucky , awarded in 1985 . The significance of the prize lay not just in its prestige — other eminent nominations have included Elliott Carter and Michael Tippett — but in the size of its financial award ( then US $ 150 @,@ 000 ) . The intention of the award is to remove recipients ' financial concerns for a period to allow them to concentrate on serious composition . In a gesture of altruism , Lutosławski announced that he would use the fund to set up a scholarship to enable young Polish composers to study abroad ; Lutosławski also directed that his fee from the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra for Chain 3 should go to this scholarship fund . 
 In 1987 Lutosławski was presented ( by Michael Tippett ) with the rarely awarded Royal Philharmonic Society 's Gold Medal during a concert in which Lutosławski conducted his Third Symphony ; also that year a major celebration of his work was made at the Huddersfield Contemporary Music Festival . In addition , he was awarded honorary doctorates at several universities worldwide , including Cambridge . 
 Lutosławski was at this time writing his Piano Concerto for Krystian <unk> , commissioned by the Salzburg Festival . His earliest plans to write a piano concerto dated from 1938 ; he was himself in his younger days a virtuoso pianist . It was a performance of this work and the Third Symphony at the Warsaw Autumn Festival in 1988 that marked the composer 's return to the conductor 's podium in Poland , after substantive talks had been arranged between the government and the opposition . 
 Lutosławski also , around 1990 , worked on a fourth symphony and his orchestral song @-@ cycle <unk> et <unk> for soprano . The latter was first performed at a Prom concert in London in 1991 , and the Fourth Symphony in 1993 with the composer conducting the Los Angeles Philharmonic . In between , and after initial reluctance , Lutosławski took on the presidency of the newly reconstituted " Polish Cultural Council " . This had been set up after the reforms in 1989 in Poland brought about by the almost total support for Solidarity in the elections of that year , and the subsequent end of communist rule and the reinstatement of Poland as an independent republic rather than the communist state of the People 's Republic of Poland . 
 He continued his busy schedule , travelling to the United States , England , Finland , Canada and Japan , and sketching a violin concerto , but by the first week of 1994 it was clear that cancer had taken hold , and after an operation the composer weakened quickly and died on 7 February at the age of eighty @-@ one . He had , a few weeks before , been awarded Poland 's highest honour , the Order of the White Eagle ( only the second person to receive this since the collapse of communism in Poland — the first had been Pope John Paul II ) . He was cremated ; his devoted wife Danuta died shortly afterwards . 
 = = Music = = 
 Lutosławski described musical composition as a search for listeners who think and feel the same way he did — he once called it " fishing for souls " . 
 A complete list of Lutosławski 's compositions in chronological order can be found at The Polish Music Center . 
 = = = Folk influence = = = 
 Lutosławski 's works up until and including the Dance Preludes clearly show the influence of Polish folk music , both harmonically and melodically . Part of his art was in transforming folk music , rather than quoting it exactly . In some cases , folk music is unrecognisable as such without careful analysis , for example , in the Concerto for Orchestra . As Lutosławski developed the techniques of his mature compositions , he stopped using folk material explicitly , although its influence remained as subtle features until the end . As he said , " [ in those days ] I could not compose as I wished , so I composed as I was able " , and about this change of direction he said , " I was simply not so interested in it [ using folk music ] " . Also , Lutosławski was dissatisfied with composing in a " post @-@ tonal " idiom : while composing the first symphony , he felt that this was for him a cul @-@ de @-@ sac . 
 = = = Pitch organisation = = = 
 In Five Songs ( 1956 – 57 ) and Musique funèbre ( 1958 ) Lutosławski introduced his own brand of twelve @-@ tone music , marking his departure from the explicit use of folk music . His twelve @-@ tone technique allowed him to build harmony and melody from specific intervals ( in Musique funèbre , augmented fourths and semitones ) . This system also gave him the means to write dense chords without resorting to tone clusters , and enabled him to build towards these dense chords ( which often include all twelve notes of the chromatic scale ) at climactic moments . Lutosławski 's twelve @-@ note techniques were thus completely different in conception from Arnold Schoenberg 's tone @-@ row system , although Musique funèbre ' does happen to be based on a tone row . This twelve @-@ note <unk> technique had its genesis in earlier works such as Symphony No. 1 , and Paganini Variations . 
 = = = <unk> technique = = = 
 Although Musique funèbre was internationally acclaimed , his new harmonic techniques led to something of a crisis for Lutosławski , during which he still could not see how to express his musical ideas . Then on 16 March 1960 , listening to Polish Radio broadcast on new music , he happened to hear John Cage 's Concert for Piano and Orchestra . Although he was not influenced by the sound or the philosophy of the music , Cage 's explorations of indeterminacy set off a train of thought which resulted in Lutosławski finding a way to retain the harmonic structures he wanted while introducing the freedom for which he was searching . His Three <unk> were hastily rounded off ( he originally intended to write four ) and he moved on to compose works in which he explored these new ideas . 
 In works from Jeux vénitiens , Lutosławski wrote long passages in which the parts of the ensemble are not to be synchronised exactly . At cues from the conductor each instrumentalist may be instructed to move straight on to the next section , to finish their current section before moving on , or to stop . In this way the random elements within compositionally controlled limits defined by the term aleatory are carefully directed by the composer , who controls the architecture and harmonic progression of the piece precisely . Lutosławski notated the music exactly ; there is no improvisation , no choice of parts is given to any instrumentalist , and there is thus no doubt about how the musical performance is to be realised . 
 For his String Quartet , Lutosławski originally produced only the four instrumental parts , refusing to bind them in a full score , because he was concerned that this would imply that he wanted notes in vertical alignment to coincide , as is the case with conventionally notated classical ensemble music . The LaSalle Quartet , however , specifically requested a score from which to prepare for the first performance . Bodman Rae relates that Danuta <unk> solved this problem by cutting up the parts and sticking them together in boxes ( which Lutosławski called mobiles ) , with instructions on how to signal in performance when all of the players should proceed to the next mobile . In his orchestral music , these problems of notation were not so difficult , because the instructions on how and when to proceed are given by the conductor . 
 Lutosławski 's called this technique of his mature period " limited <unk> " . This controlled freedom given to the individual musicians is contrasted with passages where the orchestra is asked to synchronise their parts ; the score for these passages is notated conventionally using bars ( measures ) and time signatures . 
 Both Lutosławski 's harmonic and aleatory processes are illustrated by example 1 , an excerpt from <unk> , the first movement of the Symphony No. 2 . At number 7 , the conductor gives a cue to the flutes , celesta and percussionist , who then play their parts in their own time , without any attempt to synchronise with the other instrumentalists . The harmony of this section is based on a 12 @-@ note chord built from major seconds and perfect fourths . After all the instrumentalists have finished their parts , a two @-@ second general pause is indicated . The conductor then gives a cue at number 8 ( and indicates the tempo of the following section ) for two oboes and the cor anglais . They each play their part , again with no attempt to synchronise with the other players . The harmony of this part is based on the <unk> F ♯ – G – A ♭ – C – D ♭ – D , arranged in such a way that the harmony of the section never includes any sixths or thirds . When the conductor gives another cue at number 9 , the players each continue until they reach the repeat sign , and then stop : they are unlikely to end the section at the same time . This " refrain " ( from numbers 8 to 9 ) recurs throughout the movement , slightly altered each time , but always played by double @-@ reed instruments which do not play elsewhere in the movement : Lutosławski thus also carefully controls the orchestral palette . 
 = = = Late style = = = 
 The combination of Lutosławski 's aleatory techniques and his harmonic discoveries allowed him to build up complex musical textures . According to Bodman Rae , in his later works Lutosławski evolved a more mobile , simpler , harmonic style , in which less of the music is played with an ad libitum coordination . This development first appeared in the brief Epitaph for oboe and piano , around the time Lutosławski was struggling to find the technical means to complete his Third Symphony . In chamber works for just two instrumentalists the scope for aleatory counterpoint and dense harmonies is significantly less than for orchestra , but these developments also influenced his orchestral style in late works including the Piano Concerto , <unk> et <unk> , Chain 2 and the Fourth Symphony , which require mostly conventional coordination . 
 Lutosławski 's formidable technical developments grew out of his creative imperative ; that he left a lasting body of major compositions is a testament to his resolution of purpose in the face of the anti @-@ formalist authorities under which he formulated his methods . 
 Lutosławski 's life as well as detailed and thorough discussion of Lutosławski 's music and compositional techniques can be found in both Stucky ( 1981 ) and Bodman Rae ( 1994 , 1996 , 1999 ) , but also in Witold Lutosławski – Guide to Warsaw ( 2013 ) by the National Institute of Fryderyk Chopin . 
 = Coral catshark = 
 The coral catshark ( <unk> marmoratus ) is a species of catshark , and part of the family Scyliorhinidae . It is common on shallow coral reefs across the Indo @-@ West Pacific , from Pakistan to New Guinea . Reaching up to 70 cm ( 28 in ) in length , the coral catshark has an extremely slender body , a short head and tail , and two dorsal fins that are angled backwards . It can be identified by the numerous black and white spots on its back , sides , and fins , which often merge to form horizontal bars . Furthermore , adult males have distinctively long and thin claspers . 
 <unk> and inactive during the day , at dusk and at night the coral catshark actively forages for small , bottom @-@ living invertebrates and bony fishes . Its slender form allows it to access tight spaces on the reef . It is oviparous : females lay purse @-@ shaped egg capsules two at a time on the bottom , and the young hatch after 4 – 6 months . This small , harmless shark adapts well to captivity and has reproduced in the aquarium ; it is regarded as one of the most suitable shark species for private aquarists . The coral catshark is a minor bycatch of reef fisheries , with minimal commercial value . There is increasing fishing activity and extensive habitat degradation within its range , leading to concern over its population and its assessment as Near Threatened by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The coral catshark was first described by an anonymous author , usually referred to English zoologist Edward Turner Bennett , in the 1830 Memoir of the Life and Public Services of Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles . Its original name was Scyllium <unk> , from the Latin marmoratus meaning " marbled " . Hence , another common name for this species is marbled catshark . In 1913 , Samuel Garman placed it in his newly created genus <unk> . The type specimen was caught off Sumatra and is suspected to have been lost . 
 = = Description = = 
 The coral catshark has a very slender , cylindrical , firm body and a short , narrow head . The snout is short and slightly flattened , with a blunt tip . The eyes are horizontally oval and protected by rudimentary nictitating membranes ; behind are spiracles of moderate size . The large nostrils are mostly covered by broad , triangular flaps of skin on their anterior margins , leaving small incurrent and excurrent openings . The nasal flaps reach the mouth , obscuring a pair of broad grooves connecting the excurrent openings and the mouth . The long , angular mouth has very long furrows at the corners extending onto both the upper and lower jaws . The small teeth have a narrow central cusp flanked by 1 – 2 cusplets on both sides . There are five pairs of gill slits . 
 The pectoral fins are fairly large . The first dorsal fin is angled backwards and originates over the rear of the pelvic fin bases ; the second dorsal fin is similarly shaped and slightly smaller than the first , and originates over the front quarter of the anal fin base . Adult males have thin , tapering claspers that extend about two @-@ thirds of the distance between the pelvic and anal fins . The anal fin is much smaller than the dorsal fins . The caudal fin is relatively short and broad , with an indistinct lower lobe and a ventral notch near the tip of the upper lobe . The skin is thick and covered by well @-@ calcified dermal denticles . Extremely variable in coloration , the coral catshark lacks prominent saddle markings but rather has many black and white spots on a grayish background . These spots often run together to form horizontal dashes , which include white tips on the dorsal fins and a white stripe through the gill slits . The underside is plain white . This species grows up to 70 cm ( 28 in ) long . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The most widely distributed member of its genus , the coral catshark can be found from Pakistan and India to Southeast Asia and Taiwan , including the Philippines and New Guinea . Its range extends as far north as the Ryukyu Islands . Early records from Australian waters are in fact of the related Australian marbled catshark ( A. <unk> ) and banded sand catshark ( A. fasciatus ) . Common and bottom @-@ dwelling in nature , the coral catshark inhabits inshore coral reefs at depths not exceeding 15 m ( 49 ft ) . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The elongated body of the coral catshark allows it to move into and through small spaces in the reef environment , though it does not " crawl " using its pectoral and pelvic fins like the epaulette shark ( Hemiscyllium ocellatum ) . It is primarily crepuscular and nocturnal , with active foraging activity beginning in the afternoon and ending before sunrise . During the day , it generally hides under shelter such as reef overhangs or sunken logs , either singly or in groups . Individual sharks may return to the same hiding place on successive days . This species feeds on small benthic invertebrates and bony fishes ; captive specimens have been observed lying still and lunging at prey that come into range . 
 The coral catshark is oviparous , with the female producing eggs two at a time . Each egg is enclosed in a purse @-@ shaped capsule roughly 6 – 8 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) long and 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) wide , with two constricted " waists " ; one end of the capsule is squared off while the other bears two short " horns " that may terminate in short tendrils . The female deposits the eggs on the bottom , rather than attaching them to vertical structures . The capsule is light brown when freshly laid and darkens over time . The eggs hatch in 4 – 6 months at 26 ° C ( 79 ° F ) . Newly hatched sharks measure 10 – 13 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 5 @.@ 1 in ) long and have a contrasting dorsal pattern of light and dark vertical bars , sometimes with black and white dots . At three months old , the young have grown by 4 – 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) and their coloration has faded to match that of the adults . Males and females attain sexual maturity at around 47 – 62 cm ( 19 – 24 in ) and 49 – 57 cm ( 19 – 22 in ) respectively . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Common in the aquarium trade , the coral catshark is regarded as well @-@ suited to home aquariums because of its small size , hardiness , and attractive appearance . It requires a tank at least 2 metres long , with sufficiently deep hiding places . This shark tends to be more aggressive than other small sharks , often attacking <unk> larger than it can consume . Captive individuals have been known to live up to 20 years , and the species has reproduced in the aquarium . Small numbers of coral catsharks are caught incidentally by artisanal reef fishers in eastern Indonesia and likely elsewhere ; it may be sold for meat or processed for fishmeal and liver oil , but its size limits its economic importance . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Near Threatened , and notes that with more data it may meet the criteria for Vulnerable . It is likely threatened by the rising fishing pressure throughout its range , as well as by widespread habitat degradation from blast fishing , pollution , and the mining of coral for use as building material . 
 = Operation Flavius = 
 Operation Flavius ( also referred to as the " Gibraltar killings " ) was a controversial military operation in which three members of the Provisional Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) were shot dead by the British Special Air Service ( SAS ) in Gibraltar on 6 March 1988 . The three — Seán Savage , Daniel McCann , and Mairéad Farrell — were believed to be mounting a bombing attack on British military personnel in Gibraltar . SAS soldiers challenged them in the forecourt of a petrol station , then opened fire , killing them . All three were found to be unarmed , and no bomb was discovered in Savage 's car , leading to accusations that the British government had conspired to murder them . However keys found on Farrel matched a hire car later found in Marbella ( <unk> away ) which was found to contain 64 kg of Semtex and detonators . An inquest in Gibraltar ruled that the SAS had acted lawfully , while the European Court of Human Rights held that , although there had been no conspiracy , the planning and control of the operation was so flawed as to make the use of lethal force almost inevitable . The deaths were the first in a chain of violent events in a fourteen @-@ day period ; they were followed by the Milltown Cemetery attack and the corporals killings in Belfast . 
 From late 1987 , the British authorities were aware that the IRA was planning to detonate a bomb at the changing of the guard ceremony outside the governor 's residence in the British Dependent Territory of Gibraltar . When Savage , McCann and Farrell — known IRA members — travelled to Spain in preparation for the attack , they were tracked at the request of the British government . On the day of the shootings , Savage was seen parking a white Renault in the car park used as the assembly area for the parade ; McCann and Farrell were seen crossing the border shortly afterwards . 
 After a military bomb @-@ disposal officer reported that Savage 's car should be treated as a suspected bomb , the police handed over control of the operation to the SAS . As soldiers were moving into position to intercept the trio , Savage split from McCann and Farrell and began running south . Two soldiers pursued Savage while two approached McCann and Farrell ; as they did so , the pair were said to make threatening movements , as a result of which the soldiers opened fire , shooting them multiple times . As soldiers caught up with Savage , he was alleged to have turned around to face them while reaching into his jacket ; he was also shot multiple times . All three were subsequently found to be unarmed , and Savage 's car was found to contain no explosives ; enquiries resulting from keys found on Farrell led authorities to a second car , containing a large quantity of explosives , in a car park in Spain . Almost two months after the shootings , the documentary Death on the Rock was broadcast on British television . Using reconstructions and eyewitness accounts , it presented the possibility that the three IRA members had been unlawfully killed . The documentary proved extremely controversial ; several British newspapers described it as " trial by television " . 
 The inquest into the deaths began in September 1988 . It heard from British and Gibraltar authorities that the IRA team had been tracked to Málaga Airport , where they were lost by the Spanish police , and that the three did not re @-@ emerge until Savage was sighted parking his car in Gibraltar . The soldiers each testified that they had opened fire in the belief that the suspected bombers were reaching for weapons or a remote detonator . Among the civilians who gave evidence were the eyewitnesses discovered by " Death on the Rock " , who gave accounts of seeing the three shot without warning , with their hands up , or while they were on the ground . Kenneth Asquez , who told the documentary that he had seen a soldier fire at Savage repeatedly while the latter was on the ground , retracted his statement at the inquest , claiming that he had been pressured into giving it . On 30 September , the inquest jury returned a verdict of " lawful killing " . Dissatisfied , the families took the case to the European Court of Human Rights . Delivering its judgement in 1995 , the court found that the operation had been in violation of Article 2 of the European Convention on Human Rights as the authorities ' failure to arrest the suspects at the border , combined with the information given to the soldiers , rendered the use of lethal force almost inevitable . The decision is cited as a landmark case in the use of force by the state . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Provisional Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) , now inactive , is a paramilitary organisation which aimed to establish a united Ireland and end the British administration of Northern Ireland through the use of force . The organisation was the result of a 1969 split within the previous Irish Republican Army , also known as " the IRA " ( the other resulting group , known as the Official IRA , ceased military activity during the 1970s ) . During its campaign , the IRA killed members of the armed forces , police , judiciary and prison service , including off @-@ duty and retired members , and bombed businesses and military targets in both Northern Ireland and England , with the aim of making Northern Ireland ungovernable . Daniel McCann , Seán Savage , and Mairéad Farrell were , according to journalist Brendan O 'Brien , " three of the IRA 's most senior activists " . Savage was an explosives expert and McCann was " a high @-@ ranking intelligence operative " ; both McCann and Farrell had previously served prison sentences for offences relating to explosives . 
 The Special Air Service ( formally 22 Special Air Service Regiment , or 22 SAS ) is a regiment of the British Army and part of the United Kingdom 's special forces . The SAS was sporadically assigned to operations in Northern Ireland in the early stages of the British Army 's deployment in the province , during which they were confined to South Armagh . The first large @-@ scale deployment of SAS soldiers in the Troubles was in 1976 , when the regiment 's D Squadron was committed . The SAS soon began to specialise in covert , intelligence @-@ based operations against the IRA , using more aggressive tactics than regular army and police units operating in Northern Ireland . 
 = = Build @-@ up = = 
 From late 1987 , the British authorities were aware that the IRA was planning an attack in Gibraltar and launched Operation Flavius . The intelligence appeared to be confirmed in November 1987 , when several known IRA members were detected travelling from Belfast to Spain under false identities . MI5 — the British Security Service — and the Spanish authorities became aware that an IRA active service unit was operating from the Costa del Sol and the members of the unit were placed under surveillance . After a known IRA member was sighted at the changing of the guard ceremony at " the Convent " ( the governor 's residence ) in Gibraltar , the British and Gibraltarian authorities began to suspect that the IRA was planning to attack the British soldiers with a car bomb as they assembled for the ceremony in a nearby car park . In an attempt to confirm the IRA 's intended target , the government of Gibraltar suspended the ceremony in December 1987 , citing a need to repaint the guardhouse . They believed their suspicions were confirmed when the IRA member re @-@ appeared at the ceremony when it resumed in February 1988 , and the Gibraltar authorities requested special assistance from the British government . 
 In the weeks after the resumption of the changing of the guard ceremony , the three IRA members who were to carry out the attack — Seán Savage , Daniel McCann , and Mairéad Farrell — travelled to Málaga ( 90 miles [ 140 kilometres ] along the coast from Gibraltar ) , where they each rented a car . Their activities were monitored and by early March , the British authorities were convinced that an IRA attack was imminent ; a special projects team from the SAS was despatched to the territory , apparently with the personal approval of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher . Before the operation , the SAS practised arrest techniques , while the Gibraltar authorities searched for a suitable place to hold the would @-@ be bombers after their arrest . The plan was that the SAS would assist the Gibraltar Police in arresting the IRA members — identified by MI5 officers who had been in Gibraltar for several weeks — if they were seen parking a car in Gibraltar and then attempting to leave the territory . 
 = = Events of 6 March = = 
 According to the official account of the operation , Savage entered Gibraltar undetected in a white Renault 5 at 12 : 45 ( CET ; UTC + 1 ) on 6 March 1988 . An MI5 officer recognised him and he was followed , but he was not positively identified for almost an hour and a half , during which time he parked the vehicle in the car park used as the assembly area for the changing of the guard . At 14 : 30 , McCann and Farrell were observed crossing the frontier from Spain and were also followed . They met Savage in the car park at around 14 : 50 and a few minutes later the three began walking through the town . After the three left the car park , " Soldier G " , a bomb @-@ disposal officer , was ordered to examine Savage 's car ; he returned after a few minutes and reported that the vehicle should be treated as a suspect car bomb . This soldier 's suspicion was conveyed as certainty to Soldiers " A " , " B " , " C " , and " D " , who were ordered into positions to intercept Savage , McCann , and Farrell as they walked north towards the Spanish border . " Soldier G " ' s information convinced Gibraltar Police Commissioner Joseph Canepa , who was controlling the operation , to order the arrest of the three suspects . To that end , he signed over control of the operation to " Soldier F " , the senior SAS officer , at 15 : 40 . Two minutes after receiving control , " Soldier F " ordered Soldiers " A " , " B " , " C " , and " D " to apprehend the IRA operatives , by which time they were walking north on Winston Churchill Avenue towards the airport and the border . As the soldiers approached , the suspects appeared to realise that they were being followed . Savage split from the group and began heading south , brushing against " Soldier A " as he did so ; " A " and " B " decided to continue approaching McCann and Farrell , leaving Savage to Soldiers " C " and " D " . 
 At the same time as the police handed control over to the SAS , they began making arrangements for the IRA operatives once they were in custody , including finding a police vehicle in which to transport the prisoners . A patrol car containing Inspector Luis Revagliatte and three other uniformed officers , apparently on routine patrol and with no knowledge of Operation Flavius , was ordered to return to police headquarters as a matter of urgency . The police car was stuck in heavy traffic travelling north on Smith Dorrien Avenue , close to the roundabout where it meets Winston Churchill Avenue . The official account states that at this point , Revagliatte 's driver activated the siren on the police car in order to expedite the journey back to headquarters , intending to approach the roundabout from the wrong side of the road and turn the vehicle around . The siren apparently startled McCann and Farrell , just as Soldiers " A " and " B " were about to challenge them , outside the Shell petrol station on Winston Churchill Avenue . " Soldier A " stated at the inquest that Farrell looked back at him and appeared to realise who " A " was ; " A " testified that he was drawing his pistol and intended to shout a challenge to her , but " events overtook the warning " : that McCann 's right arm " moved aggressively across the front of his body " , leading " A " to believe that McCann was reaching for a remote detonator . " A " shot McCann once in the back ; " A " went on to tell the inquest that he believed Farrell then reached for her handbag , and that he believed Farrell may also have been reaching for a remote detonator . " A " also shot Farrell once in the back , before returning to McCann — he shot McCann a further three times ( once in the body and twice in the head ) . " Soldier B " testified that he reached similar conclusions to " A " , and shot Farrell twice , then McCann once or twice , then returned to Farrell , shooting her a further three times . Soldiers " C " and " D " testified at the inquest that they were moving to apprehend Savage , who was by now 300 feet ( 91 metres ) south of the petrol station , as gunfire began behind them . " Soldier C " testified that Savage turned around while simultaneously reaching towards his jacket pocket at the same time as " C " shouted " Stop ! " ; " C " stated that he believed Savage was reaching for a remote detonator , at which point he opened fire . " Soldier C " shot Savage six times , while " Soldier D " fired nine times . All three IRA members died . One of the soldiers ' bullets , believed to have passed through Farrell , grazed a passer @-@ by . 
 Immediately after the shootings , the soldiers donned berets to identify themselves . Gibraltar Police officers , including Inspector Revagliatte and his men , began to arrive at the scene almost immediately . At 16 : 05 , only 25 minutes after assuming control , the SAS commander handed control of the operation back to the Gibraltar Police in a document stating : 
 A military assault force completed the military option in respect of the terrorist ASU in Gibraltar and returns control to the civil power . 
 Shortly after the shootings , soldiers and police officers evacuated buildings in the vicinity of the Convent , while bomb @-@ disposal experts got to work ; four hours later , the authorities announced that a car bomb had been defused , after which Savage 's white Renault was towed from the car park by an army truck . The SAS personnel , meanwhile , left Gibraltar on a Royal Air Force aircraft . 
 When the bodies were searched , a set of car keys was found on Farrell . Spanish and British authorities conducted enquiries to trace the vehicle , which — two days after the shootings — led them to a red Ford Fiesta in a car park in Marbella ( 50 miles [ 80 kilometres ] from Gibraltar ) . The car contained a large quantity of Semtex surrounded by 200 rounds of ammunition , along with four detonators and two timers . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Within minutes of the military operation ending , the British Ministry of Defence ( MoD ) issued a press release , stating that " a suspected car bomb has been found in Gibraltar , and three suspects have been shot dead by the civilian police " . That evening , both the BBC and the ITN ( Independent Television News ) reported that the IRA team had been involved in a " shootout " with the authorities . The following morning , BBC Radio 4 reported that the alleged bomb was " packed with bits of metal and shrapnel " , and later carried a statement from Ian Stewart , Minister of State for the Armed Forces , that " military personnel were involved . A car bomb was found , which has been defused " . Each of the eleven British daily newspapers reported the alleged finding of the car bomb , of which eight quoted its size as 500 pounds ( 230 kilograms ) . The IRA issued a statement later on 7 March to the effect that McCann , Savage , and Farrell were " on active service " in Gibraltar and had " access to and control over 140 pounds ( 64 kg ) " of Semtex . 
 According to one case study of the killings , the events " provide an opportunity to examine the ideological functioning of the news media within [ the Troubles ] " . The British broadsheet newspapers all exhibited what the authors called " ideological closure " by marginalising the IRA and extolling the SAS . Each of the broadsheets focused , for example , on the alleged bomb and the potential devastation it could have caused without questioning the government 's version of events . 
 At 15 : 30 ( GMT ) on 7 March , the foreign secretary , Sir Geoffrey Howe , made a statement to the House of Commons : 
 Shortly before 1 : 00pm yesterday , afternoon [ Savage ] brought a white Renault car into Gibraltar and was seen to park it in the area where the guard mounting ceremony assembles . Before leaving the car , he was seen to spend some time making adjustments in the vehicle 
 An hour and a half later , [ McCann and Farrell ] were seen to enter Gibraltar on foot and shortly before 3 : 00pm , joined [ Savage ] in the town . Their presence and actions near the parked Renault car gave rise to strong suspicions that it contained a bomb , which appeared to be corroborated by a rapid technical examination of the car . 
 About 3 : 30pm , all three left the scene and started to walk back towards the border . On their way to the border , they were challenged by the security forces . When challenged , they made movements which led the military personnel , operating in support of the Gibraltar Police , to conclude that their own lives and the lives of others were under threat . In light of this response , they [ the IRA members ] were shot . Those killed were subsequently found not to have been carrying arms . 
 The parked Renault car was subsequently dealt with by a military bomb @-@ disposal team . It has now been established that it did not contain an explosive device . 
 Press coverage in the following days , after Howe 's statement that no bomb had been found , continued to focus on the act planned by the IRA ; several newspapers reported a search for a fourth member of the team . Reports of the discovery of the bomb in Marbella appeared to vindicate the government 's version of events and justify the killings . Several MPs made statements critical of the operation , while a group of Labour MPs tabled a condemnatory motion in the House of Commons . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The IRA notified the McCann , Savage , and Farrell families of the deaths on the evening of 6 March . In Belfast , Joe Austin , a senior local member of Sinn Féin , was assigned the task of recovering the bodies for burial . On 9 March , he and Terence Farrell ( one of Mairéad Farrell 's brothers ) travelled to Gibraltar to identify the bodies . Austin negotiated a charter aircraft to collect the corpses from Gibraltar and fly them to Ireland on 14 March . Two thousand people waited to meet the coffins in Dublin , which were then driven north to Belfast . Northern Irish authorities flooded the neighbourhoods where McCann , Farrell and Savage had lived with soldiers and police to try to prevent public displays of sympathy for the dead . Later that evening , a local IRA member , Kevin McCracken , was shot and allegedly then beaten to death by a group of soldiers he had been attempting to shoot at . At the border , the authorities met the procession with a large number of police and military vehicles , and insisted on intervals between the hearses , causing tensions between the police and the members of the procession and leading to accusations that the police rammed Savage 's hearse . 
 The animosity between the mourners and the police continued until the procession split to allow the hearses to travel to the respective family homes , and then on to Milltown cemetery . The Royal Ulster Constabulary ( RUC ) agreed to maintain a minimal presence at the funeral in exchange for guarantees from the families that there would be no salute by masked gunmen . This agreement was leaked to Michael Stone . During the funeral , Stone , who described himself as a " freelance Loyalist paramilitary " , threw several hand grenades into the congregation , before firing an automatic pistol at the gathered mourners , injuring 60 people . After initial confusion , several of the mourners began to pursue Stone , throwing rocks and shouting abuse . Stone fired on his pursuers , hitting and killing three . He was eventually captured by members of the crowd , who had chased him onto a road , and beaten him with rocks and makeshift weapons until the RUC arrived to extract him and arrest him . 
 The funeral of <unk> Mac <unk> ( né Kevin Brady ) , the third and last of the Milltown attack victims to be buried , was scheduled for 19 March . As his cortège proceeded along Andersontown Road , a car being driven by two British Army corporals , David Howes and Derek Wood , entered the street and sped past two teams of stewards , who were attempting to direct traffic out of the procession 's path . As the corporals continued along Andersontown Road , they came across the cortège , and mounted the footpath to avoid colliding with it . They continued until blocked by parked cars , at which point they attempted to reverse , but were blocked by vehicles from the cortège and a hostile crowd surrounded their vehicle . 
 As members of the crowd began to break into the vehicle , some using makeshift weapons , one of the corporals drew and fired a pistol , which momentarily subdued the crowd , before both men were dragged from the car , beaten and disarmed . Shortly afterwards , the corporals were dragged across the road to Casement Park , where they were beaten further . A local priest intervened to stop the beating , but was pulled away when a military identity card was discovered , raising speculation that the corporals were members of the SAS . The two were bundled semi @-@ conscious over a wall by IRA operatives , who jumped over the wall and forced the corporals into the back of a black taxi and sped away . The taxi took the corporals and the IRA men to an area of waste ground in West Belfast , the IRA men continuing to beat the soldiers en route . Six men were seen leaving the vehicle . The two corporals , apparently dazed from their injuries , staggered from the taxi , but were quickly restrained . Another IRA man arrived with a pistol taken from one of the soldiers , with which he repeatedly shot each of the corporals before handing the weapon to another man , who shot the corporals ' bodies multiple times . Margaret Thatcher described the corporals ' killings as the " single most horrifying event in Northern Ireland " during her premiership . 
 The shootings sparked the largest criminal investigation in Northern Ireland 's history , which created fresh tension in Belfast as republicans saw what they believed was a disparity in the efforts the RUC expended in investigating the corporals ' murders compared with those of republican civilians . Over four years , more than 200 people were arrested in connection with the killings , of whom 41 were charged with a variety of offences . The first of the so @-@ named " Casement Trials " concluded quickly ; two men were found guilty of murder and given life sentences in the face of overwhelming evidence . Of the trials that followed , many were based on weaker evidence and proved much more controversial . 
 = = " Death on the Rock " = = 
 On 28 April 1988 , almost two months after the Gibraltar shootings , ITV broadcast an episode of its current affairs series This Week , produced by Thames Television , entitled " Death on the Rock " . This Week sent three journalists to investigate the circumstances surrounding the shootings from both Spain and Gibraltar . Using eyewitness accounts , and with the cooperation of the Spanish authorities , the documentary reconstructed the events leading up to the shootings ; the Spanish police assisted in the reconstruction of the surveillance operation mounted against the IRA members as they travelled around Spain in the weeks before 6 March , and the journalists hired a helicopter to film the route . In Gibraltar , they located several new eyewitnesses to the shootings , who each said they had seen McCann , Savage , and Farrell shot without warning or shot after they had fallen to the ground ; most agreed to be filmed and provided signed statements . One witness , Kenneth Asquez , provided two near @-@ identical statements through intermediaries , but refused to meet with the journalists or sign either statement . After failing to persuade Asquez to sign his statement , the journalists eventually incorporated his account of seeing Savage shot while on the ground into the programme . 
 For technical advice , the journalists engaged Lieutenant Colonel George Styles GC , a retired British Army officer who was regarded as an expert in explosives and ballistics . Styles believed that it would have been obvious to the authorities that Savage 's car was unlikely to contain a bomb as the weight would have been obvious on the vehicle 's springs ; he also expressed his opinion that a remote detonator could not have reached the car park from the scenes of the shootings given the number of buildings and other obstacles between the locations . As the government refused to comment on the shootings until the inquest , the documentary concluded by putting its evidence to a leading human rights lawyer , who expressed his belief that a judicial inquiry was necessary to establish the facts surrounding the shootings . 
 The documentary attracted considerable controversy . On 26 April , two days before the programme was scheduled for broadcast , Sir Geoffrey Howe telephoned the chairman of the Independent Broadcasting Authority ( IBA ) to request that the authority delay the broadcast until after the inquest on the grounds that it risked prejudicing the proceedings . After viewing the programme and taking legal advice , the IBA decided on the morning of 28 April that " Death on the Rock " should be broadcast as scheduled , and Howe was informed of the decision . Howe made further representation to the IBA that the documentary would be in contempt of the inquest ; after taking further legal advice , the IBA upheld its decision to allow the broadcast . The programme was broadcast at 21 : 00 ( GMT ) on 28 April . The following morning , the British tabloid newspapers lambasted the programme , describing it as a " slur " on the SAS and " trial by television " , while several criticised the IBA for allowing the documentary to be broadcast . Over the following weeks , newspapers repeatedly printed stories about the documentary 's witnesses , in particular Carmen Proetta , who gave an account of seeing McCann and Farrell shot without warning by soldiers who arrived in a Gibraltar Police car . Proetta subsequently sued several newspapers for libel and won substantial damages . The Sunday Times conducted its own investigation and reported that " Death on the Rock " had misrepresented the views of its witnesses ; the witnesses involved later complained to other newspapers that " The Sunday Times " had distorted their comments . 
 = = Inquest = = 
 Unusually for Gibraltar , there was a long delay between the shootings and the setting of a date for the inquest ( the usual method for investigating sudden or controversial deaths in the United Kingdom and its territories ) ; eight weeks after the shootings , the coroner , Felix Pizzarello , announced that the inquest would begin on 27 June . Two weeks later ( unknown to Pizzarello ) , Margaret Thatcher 's press secretary announced that the inquest had been indefinitely postponed . The inquest began on 6 September . Pizzarello presided over the proceedings , while eleven jurors evaluated the evidence ; representing the Gibraltar government was Eric <unk> , the Gibraltar attorney general . The interested parties were represented by John Laws , QC ( for the British government ) , Michael Hucker ( for the SAS personnel ) , and Patrick McGrory ( for the families of McCann , Farrell , and Savage ) . Inquests are non @-@ adversarial proceedings aimed at investigating the circumstances of a death ; the investigation is conducted by the coroner , while the representatives of interested parties can cross @-@ examine witnesses . Where the death occurred through the deliberate action of another person , the jury can return a verdict of " lawful killing " , " unlawful killing " , or an " open verdict " ; though inquests cannot apportion blame , in the case of a verdict of unlawful killing the authorities will consider whether any prosecutions should be brought . There was initially doubt as to whether the SAS personnel involved in the shootings would appear at the inquest . Inquests have no powers to compel witnesses to appear if the witness is outside the court 's jurisdiction , although the soldiers apparently volunteered after Pizzarello declared that the inquest would be " meaningless " without their evidence . The soldiers and MI5 officers gave their evidence anonymously and from behind a screen . As the inquest began , observers including Amnesty International expressed concern that McGrory was at a disadvantage , as all of the other lawyers were privy to the evidence of the SAS and MI5 personnel before it was given . The cost of the transcript for each day 's proceedings was increased ten @-@ fold the day before the inquest began . 
 In total , the inquest heard evidence from 79 witnesses , including the Gibraltar Police officers , MI5 personnel , and SAS soldiers involved in the operation , along with technical experts and civilian eyewitnesses . 
 = = = Police , military , and MI5 witnesses = = = 
 The first witnesses to testify were the Gibraltar Police officers involved in the operation and its aftermath . Following them , on 7 September , was " Mr O " , the senior MI5 officer in charge of Operation Flavius . " O " told the inquest that , in January 1988 , Belgian authorities found a car being used by IRA operatives in Brussels . In the car were found a quantity of Semtex , detonators , and equipment for a radio detonation device , which , " O " told the coroner , led MI5 to the conclusion that the IRA might use a similar device for the planned attack in Gibraltar . MI5 further believed that the IRA had been unlikely to use a " blocking car " ( an empty vehicle used to hold a parking space until the bombers bring in the vehicle containing the explosives ) as this entailed the added risk of multiple border crossings . Finally , " O " told the coroner that McCann , Savage , and Farrell had been observed by Spanish authorities arriving at Málaga Airport , after which he claimed the trio had been lost , and that the British and Gibraltarian authorities did not detect them crossing the border . 
 Joseph Canepa , commissioner of the Gibraltar Police , was the next senior figure to testify . He told the inquest that ( contrary to McGrory 's assertions ) there had been no conspiracy to kill McCann , Savage , and Farrell . Canepa told the coroner that , upon learning of the IRA plot from MI5 , he set up an advisory committee , which consisted of MI5 officials , senior military officers , and the commissioner himself ; as events developed , the committee decided that the Gibraltar Police was not adequately equipped to counter the IRA threat , and Canepa requested assistance from London . The commissioner gave assurances that he had been in command of the operation against the IRA at all times , except for the 25 minutes during which he signed over control to the military . In his cross @-@ examination , McGrory queried the level of control the commissioner had over the operation ; he extracted from Canepa that the commissioner had not requested assistance from the SAS specifically . Canepa agreed with " O " that the Spanish police had lost track of the IRA team , and that Savage 's arrival in Gibraltar took the authorities by surprise . Although a police officer was stationed in an observation post at the border with instructions for alerting other officers to the arrival of the IRA team , Canepa told the inquest that the officer had been looking for the three IRA members arriving at once . When pressed , he told McGrory he was " unsure " whether or not the officer had the details of the false passports the trio were travelling under . Two days after Canepa 's testimony concluded , Detective Constable Charles Huart , the Gibraltar Police officer in the observation post at the border on 6 March , appeared . When cross @-@ examined , Huart denied knowing the pseudonyms under which the IRA team were travelling . On cross @-@ examination , Huart acknowledged having been provided with the pseudonyms at a briefing the night before the shootings . Detective Chief Inspector ( DCI ) Joseph <unk> , head of the Gibraltar Police Special Branch , offered a different account when he gave evidence the following day . He told the coroner that the Spanish border guards had let Savage through out of carelessness , while the regular border officials on the Gibraltar side had not been told to look for the IRA team . 
 " Soldier F " , a British Army colonel who was in command of the SAS detachment involved in Operation Flavius , took the stand on 12 September . " F " was followed the next day by " Soldier E " , a junior SAS officer who was directly responsible for the soldiers who carried out the shootings . After the officers , the inquest heard from Soldiers " A " , " B " , " C " , and " D " , the SAS soldiers who shot McCann , Savage , and Farrell . The SAS personnel all told the coroner that they had been briefed to expect the would @-@ be bombers to be in possession of a remote detonator , and that they had been told that Savage 's car definitely contained a bomb . Each soldier testified that the IRA team made movements which the soldiers believed to be threatening , and this prompted the soldiers to open fire . McGrory asked about the SAS 's policy on lethal force during cross @-@ examination ; he asked " D " about allegations that Savage was shot while on the ground , something " D " strenuously denied . McGrory asked " D " if he had intended to continue shooting Savage until he was dead , to which " D " replied in the affirmative . 
 Several Gibraltar Police officers , including Special Branch officers , gave evidence about the aftermath of the shootings and the subsequent police investigation . Immediately after the shootings , the soldiers ' shell casings were removed from the scene ( making it difficult to assess where the soldiers were standing when they fired ) ; two Gibraltar Police officers testified to collecting the casings , one for fear that they might be stolen and the other on the orders of a superior . Statements from other police and military witnesses revealed that the Gibraltar Police had lost evidence and that the soldiers did not give statements to the police until over a week after the shootings . 
 = = = Civilian witnesses = = = 
 One of the first witnesses with no involvement in Operation Flavius to give evidence to the inquest was Allen <unk> , Principal Scientific Officer at the Royal Armaments Research and Development Establishment . He posited that a remote detonator could reach from the scenes of the shootings to the car park in which Savage had left the white Renault and beyond . On cross @-@ examination , he stated that the aerial on the Renault was not the type he would expect to be used for receiving a detonation signal , adding that the IRA had not been known to use a remote @-@ detonated bomb without a direct line of sight to their target . The following day , " Soldier G " ( who had made the determination that the white Renault contained a bomb ) told the coroner that he was not an explosives expert , and that his assessment was based on his belief that the vehicle 's aerial looked " too new " . Dissatisfied , McGrory called his own expert witness — Dr Michael Scott , an expert in radio @-@ controlled detonation — who disagreed with government witnesses that a bomb at the assembly area could have been detonated from the petrol station where McCann and Farrell were shot , having conducted tests prior to testifying . The government responded by commissioning its own tests , conducted by British Army signallers , which showed that radio communication between the petrol station and the car park was possible , but not guaranteed . 
 Professor Alan Watson , a British forensic pathologist , carried out a post @-@ mortem examination of the bodies . Watson arrived in Gibraltar the day after the shootings , by which time the bodies had been taken to the Royal Navy Hospital ; he found that the bodies had been stripped of their clothing ( causing difficulties in distinguishing entry and exit wounds ) , that the mortuary had no X @-@ ray machine ( which would have allowed Watson to track the paths of the bullets through the bodies ) , and that he was refused access to any other X @-@ ray machine . After the professor returned to his home in Scotland , he was refused access to the results of blood tests and other evidence which had been sent for analysis and was dissatisfied with the photographs taken by the Gibraltar Police photographer who had assisted him . At the inquest , McGrory noted and questioned the lack of assistance given to the pathologist , which Watson told him was " a puzzle " . Watson concluded that McCann had been shot four times — once in the jaw ( possibly a ricochet ) , once in the head , and twice in the back ; Farrell was shot five times ( twice in the face and three times in the back ) . Watson was unable to determine exactly how many times Savage was shot — he estimated that it was possibly as many as eighteen times . McGrory asked Watson whether the pathologist would agree that Savage 's body was " riddled with bullets " ; Watson 's answer made headlines the following morning : " I concur with your word . Like a frenzied attack " . Watson agreed that the evidence suggested the deceased were shot while on the ground ; a second pathologist called by McGrory offered similar findings . Two weeks later , the court heard from David Pryor — a forensic scientist working for London 's Metropolitan Police — who had analysed the clothes of the dead ; he told the inquest his analysis had been hampered by the condition of the clothing when it arrived . Pryor offered evidence contradictory to that given by Soldiers " A " and " B " about their proximity to McCann and Farrell when they opened fire — the soldiers claimed they were at least six feet ( 1 @.@ 8 metres ) away , but Pryor 's analysis was that McCann and Farrell were shot from a distance of no more than two or three feet ( 0 @.@ 6 or 0 @.@ 9 metres ) . 
 Aside from experts and security personnel , several eyewitnesses gave evidence to the inquest . Three witnessed parts of the shootings , and gave accounts which supported the official version of events — in particular , they did not witness the SAS shooting any of the suspects while they were on the floor . Witnesses uncovered by the journalists making " Death on the Rock " also appeared : Stephen Bullock repeated his account of seeing McCann and Savage raise their hands before the SAS shot them ; Josie Celecia repeated her account of seeing a soldier shooting at McCann and Farrell while the pair were on the ground . Hucker pointed out that parts of Celecia 's testimony had changed since she spoke to " Death on the Rock " , and suggested that the gunfire she heard was from the shooting of Savage rather than sustained shooting of McCann and Farrell while they were on the ground , a suggestion Celecia rejected ; the SAS 's lawyer further observed that she was unable to identify the military personnel in photographs her husband had taken . Maxie Proetta told the coroner that he had witnessed four men ( three in plain clothes and one uniformed Gibraltar Police officer ) arriving opposite the petrol station on Winston Churchill Avenue ; the men jumped over the central reservation barrier and Farrell put her hands up , after which he heard a series of shots . In contrast to his wife 's testimony , he believed that Farrell 's gesture was one of self @-@ defence rather than surrender , and he believed that the shots he heard did not come from the men from the police car . The government lawyers suggested that the police car the <unk> saw was the one being driven by Inspector Revagliatte , carrying four uniformed police officers rather than plain @-@ clothed soldiers , but Proetta was adamant that the lawyers ' version did not make sense . His wife gave evidence the following day . Contrary to her statement to " Death on the Rock " , Carmen Proetta was no longer certain that she had seen McCann and Savage shot while on the ground . The government lawyers questioned the reliability of Proetta 's evidence based on her changes , and implied that she behaved suspiciously by giving evidence to " Death on the Rock " before the police . She responded that the police had not spoken to her about the shootings until after " Death on the Rock " had been shown . 
 Asquez , who provided an unsworn statement to the " Death on the Rock " team through an intermediary , which the journalists included in the programme , reluctantly appeared . He retracted the statements he made to " Death on the Rock " , which he claimed he had made up after " pestering " from Major Bob Randall ( another " Death on the Rock " witness , who had sold the programme a video recording of the aftermath of the shootings ) . The British media covered Asquez 's retraction extensively , while several members of parliament accused Asquez of lying for the television ( and " Death on the Rock " of encouraging him ) in an attempt to discredit the SAS and the British government . Nonetheless , Pizzarello asked Asquez if he could explain why his original statement mentioned the Soldiers " C " and " D " donning berets , showing identity cards , and telling members of the public " it 's okay , it 's the police " after shooting Savage ( details which were not public before the inquest ) ; Asquez replied that he could not , because he was " a bit confused " . 
 = = = Verdict = = = 
 The inquest concluded on 30 September , and Laws and McGrory made their submissions to the coroner regarding the instructions he should give to the jury ( Hucker allowed Laws to speak on his behalf ) . Laws asked the coroner to instruct the jury not to return a verdict of " unlawful killing " on the grounds that there had been a conspiracy to murder the IRA operatives within the British government , as he believed that no evidence had been presented at the inquest to support such a conclusion . He did also allow for the possibility that the SAS personnel had individually acted unlawfully . McGrory , on the other hand , asked the coroner to allow for the possibility that the British government had conspired to murder McCann , Savage , and Farrell , which he believed was evidenced by the decision to use the SAS for Operation Flavius . The decision , according to McGrory was 
 wholly unreasonable and led to a lot of what happened afterwards ... it started a whole chain of unreasonable decisions which led to the three killings , which I submit were unlawful and criminal killings . 
 When the coroner asked McGrory to clarify whether he believed there had been a conspiracy to murder the IRA operatives , he responded 
 that the choice of the SAS is of great significance ... If the killing of the ASU was , in fact , contemplated by those who chose the SAS , as an act of counter @-@ terror or vengeance , that steps outside the rule of law and it was murder ... and that is a matter for the jury to consider . 
 After listening to both arguments , Pizzarello summarised the evidence for the jury and instructed them that they could return a verdict of " unlawful killing " under any of five circumstances , including if they were satisfied that there had been a conspiracy within the British government to murder the three suspected terrorists . He also urged the jury to return a conclusive verdict , rather than the " ambiguity " of an " open verdict " , and instructed them not to make recommendations or add a rider to their verdict . 
 The jury retired at 11 : 30 to start their deliberations . Pizzarello summoned them back after six hours with the warning that they were " at the edge " of the time in which they were allowed to come to a verdict . Just over two hours later , the jury returned . By a majority of nine to two , they returned a verdict of lawful killing . 
 Following the inquest , evidence came to light to contradict the version of events presented by the British government at the inquest . Six weeks after the conclusion of the inquest , a Gibraltar Police operations order leaked ; the document listed Inspector Revagliatte , who had claimed to be on routine patrol , unaware of Operation Flavius , and whose siren apparently triggered the shootings , as the commander of two police firearms teams assigned to the operation . In February 1989 , British journalists discovered that the IRA team operating in Spain must have contained more members than the three killed in Gibraltar . The staff at the agencies from which the team rented their vehicles gave the Spanish police descriptions which did not match McCann , Savage , or Farrell ; Savage 's white Renault , meanwhile , was rented several hours before Savage himself arrived in Spain . 
 It emerged that the Spanish authorities knew where McCann and Savage were staying ; a senior Spanish police officer repeatedly told journalists that the IRA cell had been under surveillance throughout their time in Spain , and that the Spanish told the British authorities that they did not believe that the three were in possession of a bomb on 6 March . Although the Spanish government remained silent about the claims and counter @-@ claims , it honoured 22 police officers at a secret awards ceremony for Spanish participants in Operation Flavius in December 1988 , and a government minister told a press conference in March 1989 that " we followed the terrorists . They were completely under our control " . The same month , a journalist discovered that the Spanish side of the operation was conducted by the Foreign Intelligence Brigade rather than the local police as the British government had suggested . The Independent and Private Eye conjectured as to the reason for the Spanish government 's silence — in 1988 , Spain was attempting to join the Western European Union , but was opposed by Britain ( which was already a member ) ; the papers ' theory was that Margaret Thatcher 's government placed political pressure on the Spanish , and that Britain later dropped its opposition in exchange for the Spanish government 's silence on Operation Flavius . 
 = = Legal proceedings = = 
 In March 1990 , almost two years after the shootings , the McCann , Savage , and Farrell families began proceedings against the British government at the High Court in London . The case was dismissed on the grounds that Gibraltar was not part of the United Kingdom , and was thus outside the court 's jurisdiction . The families launched an appeal , but withdrew it in the belief that it had no prospect of success . The families proceeded to apply to the European Commission of Human Rights for an opinion on whether the authorities ' actions in Gibraltar violated Article 2 ( the " right to life " ) of the European Convention on Human Rights ( ECHR ) . Issuing its report in April 1993 , the commission criticised the conduct of the operation , but found that there had been no violation of Article 2 . Nevertheless , the commission referred the case to the European Court of Human Rights ( ECtHR ) for a final decision . 
 The British government submitted that the killings were " absolutely necessary " , within the meaning of Article 2 , paragraph 2 , to protect the people of Gibraltar from unlawful violence , because the soldiers who carried out the shootings genuinely believed that McCann , Savage , and Farrell were capable of detonating a car bomb , and of doing so by remote control . The families contested the government 's claim , alleging that the government had conspired to kill the three ; that the planning and control of the operation was flawed ; that the inquest was not adequately equipped to investigate the killings ; and that the applicable laws of Gibraltar were not compliant with Article 2 of the ECHR . The court found that the soldiers ' " reflex action " in resorting to lethal force was excessive , but that the soldiers ' actions did not — in their own right — give rise to a violation of Article 2 . The court held that the soldiers ' use of force based on an honestly held belief ( that the suspects were armed or in possession of a remote detonator ) could be justified , even if that belief was later found to be mistaken . To hold otherwise would , in the court 's opinion , place too great a burden on law @-@ enforcement personnel . It also dismissed all other allegations , except that regarding the planning and control of the operation . In that respect , the court found that the authorities ' failure to arrest the suspects as they crossed the border or earlier , combined with the information that was passed to the soldiers , rendered the use of lethal force almost inevitable . Thus , the court decided there had been a violation of Article 2 in the control of the operation . 
 As the three suspects had been killed while preparing an act of terrorism , the court rejected the families ' claims for damages , as well as their claim for expenses incurred at the inquest . The court did order the British government to pay the applicants ' costs incurred during the proceedings in Strasbourg . The government initially suggested it would not pay , and there was discussion in parliament of the UK withdrawing from the ECHR . It paid the costs on 24 December 1995 , within days of the three @-@ month deadline which had been set by the court . 
 = = Long @-@ term impact = = 
 A history of the Gibraltar Police described Operation Flavius as " the most controversial and violent event " in the history of the force , while journalist Nicholas Eckert described the incident as " one of the great controversies of the Troubles " and academic Richard English posited that the " awful sequence of interwoven deaths " was one of the conflict 's " most strikingly memorable and shocking periods " . The explosives the IRA intended to use in Gibraltar were believed to have come from Libyan ruler Muammar Gaddafi who was known to be supplying arms to the IRA in the 1980s ; some sources speculated that Gibraltar was chosen for its relative proximity to Libya , and the targeting of the territory was intended as a gesture of gratitude to Gaddafi . 
 Maurice Punch , an academic specialising in policing issues , described the ECtHR verdict as " a landmark case with important implications " for the control of police operations involving firearms . According to Punch , the significance of the ECtHR judgement was that it placed accountability for the failures in the operation with its commanders , rather than with the soldiers who carried out the shooting itself . Punch believed that the ruling demonstrated that operations intended to arrest suspects should be conducted by civilian police officers , rather than soldiers . The case is considered a landmark in cases concerning Article 2 , particularly in upholding the principle that Article 2 , paragraph 2 , defines circumstances in which it is permissible to use force which may result in a person 's death as an unintended consequence , rather than circumstances in which it is permissible to intentionally deprive a person of their life . It has been cited in later ECtHR cases concerning the use of lethal force by police . 
 After the inquest verdict , the Governor of Gibraltar , Air Chief Marshal Sir Peter Terry declared " Even in this remote place , there is no place for terrorists . " In apparent revenge for his role in Operation Flavius , Terry and his wife , Lady Betty Terry , were shot and seriously injured in front of their daughter when IRA paramilitaries opened fire on the Terry home in Staffordshire two years later , in September 1990 . 
 Following Kenneth Asquez 's retraction of the statement he gave to " Death on the Rock " and his allegation that he was pressured into giving a false account of the events he witnessed , the IBA contacted Thames Television to express its concern and to raise the possibility of an investigation into the making of the documentary . Thames eventually agreed to commission an independent inquiry into the programme ( the first such inquiry into an individual programme ) , to be conducted by two people with no connection to either Thames or the IBA ; Thames engaged Lord Windlesham and Richard Rampton , QC to conduct the investigation . In their report , published in January 1989 , Windlesham and Rampton levelled several criticisms at " Death on the Rock " , but found it to be a " trenchant " piece of work made in " good faith and without ulterior motives " . In conclusion , the authors believed that " Death on the Rock " proved " freedom of expression can prevail in the most extensive , and the most immediate , of all the means of mass communication " . 
 = Ōkami = 
 Ōkami ( Japanese : 大神 , literally " great god " , " great spirit " or " wolf " if written as <unk> ) is an action @-@ adventure video game developed by Clover Studio and published by Capcom . It was released for Sony Computer Entertainment 's PlayStation 2 video game console in 2006 in Japan and North America , and in 2007 in Europe and Australia . Despite the closure of Clover Studio a few months after the game 's initial release , a version for Nintendo 's Wii console was developed and produced by Ready at Dawn , Tose and Capcom , which was released in North America in April 2008 , in Europe in June 2008 , and in Japan in October 2009 . 
 Set sometime in classical Japanese history , the game combines several Japanese myths , legends and folklore to tell the story of how the land was saved from darkness by the Shinto sun goddess , named Amaterasu , who took the form of a white wolf . It features a distinct sumi @-@ e @-@ inspired cel @-@ shaded visual style and the Celestial Brush , a gesture @-@ system to perform miracles . 
 Ōkami was one of the last PlayStation 2 games selected for release prior to the release of the PlayStation 3 . Although it suffered from poor sales , the game received critical acclaim , earning the title of IGN 's 2006 Game of the Year . The Wii version has earned similar praise , though the motion control scheme has received mixed reviews . 
 A high @-@ definition port of the game was released on the PlayStation 3 via the PlayStation Network in October 2012 and for retail in Japan in November 2012 , supporting the use of the PlayStation Move motion controller . A sequel for the Nintendo DS titled Ōkamiden was released in Japan in September 2010 , followed by North America and Europe in March 2011 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game has the player controlling the main character , Amaterasu , in a woodcut , watercolor style , cel @-@ shaded environment , which looks like an animated Japanese ink @-@ illustration ( known as ink wash painting , sumi @-@ e ) with other styles of art . The gameplay style is a mix of action , platform , and puzzle gaming genres , and has been noted by many reviewers to have numerous similarities in overall gameplay style to The Legend of Zelda series , an inspiration that director Hideki Kamiya , a self @-@ proclaimed Zelda @-@ fan , has admitted has influenced his general game design . The main story is primarily linear , directed through by Amaterasu 's guide Issun , though numerous side quests and optional activities allow for players to explore the game world and take the story at their own pace . By completing quests , side quests and small additional activities ( such as making trees bloom into life or feeding wild animals ) , Amaterasu earns Praise , which can then be spent to increase various statistics of the character , such as the amount of health and number of ink wells for Celestial Brush techniques . 
 Combat is staged in a ghostly virtual arena , and Amaterasu can fight enemies using a combination of weapons , fighting techniques and Brush methods to dispatch the foes . At the end of combat , money ( as yen ) is rewarded to Amaterasu , with bonuses for completing a battle quickly and without taking damage . The money can be spent on numerous items from merchants across the land , including healing goods , better weapons , tools and key items for completing quests . The money can also be used to buy new combat techniques at dojos throughout the land . 
 Additionally , rare Demon Fangs can be earned through combat which can be traded for additional , unique items that are beneficial in gameplay but not required to complete the game . Weapons inspired by the Imperial Regalia of Japan ( the Reflector , the <unk> and the Glaive ) can be equipped on Amaterasu as either main or sub @-@ weapons ( one each ) , and used in addition to other melee attacks that the player can have Amaterasu learn through the course of the game . 
 = = = Celestial Brush = = = 
 Unique to Ōkami is the Celestial Brush . Players can bring the game to a pause and call up a canvas , where the player can draw onto the screen , either using the left analog stick on the DualShock controller , or pointing with the Wii Remote or PlayStation Move controller in subsequent remakes . This feature is used in combat , puzzles and as general gameplay . For example , the player can create strong wind by drawing a loop , cut enemies by drawing a line through them or fix bridges by painting on the broken one , amongst many other abilities . These techniques are learned through the course of the game by completing constellations to release the Celestial Brush gods ( inspired by the Chinese zodiac ) from their hiding spots . It is also possible to upgrade or modify certain Brush powers later in the game ; for example , the Celestial Brush power " Inferno " can gain a new power called " <unk> " , which has a different drawing pattern , and allows players to create flames without relying on torches or other related items . The player 's ink for drawing is limited by the amount available in special ink wells , preventing the player from solely using Brush techniques to defeat enemies ; ink is restored in the wells over time when the Brush is not used . 
 = = Plot = = 
 ( Please note that most character names below are the shortened names of the U.S. version . ) 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game is set in a Nippon ( Japan ) based on Japanese folklore , and begins with a flashback to events 100 years prior to the game 's present ; the narrator describes how Shiranui , a pure white wolf , and Nagi , a swordsman , together fought the eight @-@ headed demon Orochi to save Kamiki Village and Nagi 's beloved maiden Nami . Shiranui and Nagi seal Orochi at the cave . 
 In the game 's present , Susano , a descendant of Nagi and self @-@ proclaimed greatest warrior , breaks Orochi 's seal because he does not believe in the legend and wants to prove it false ; Orochi escapes and curses the lands , sapping the life from every living being . Sakuya , the wood sprite and guardian of Kamiki Village , calls forth Amaterasu , the sun goddess , known to the villagers as the reincarnation of the white wolf Shiranui , and pleads for her to remove the curse that covers the land . Accompanied by the artist Issun ( an inch @-@ high creature known as a <unk> ) , Amaterasu restores the land to its normal state . 
 Throughout her journey , Amaterasu is hounded by Waka , a handsome and strange but powerful individual who seems to have the gift of foresight and further teases Amaterasu and Issun to his own mysterious ends . Additionally , Amaterasu locates several Celestial Gods who have hidden in the constellations ; the gods bestow upon the goddess powers of the Celestial Brush to aid in her quest . 
 Soon , Amaterasu and Susano defeat Orochi to protect Kamiki Village and rescue Susano 's maiden , Kushi , recreating events from 100 years prior . This time , the duo are able to fully conquer the demon , causing a black , evil spirit to float northward . Amaterasu and Issun then embark on a journey across Nippon , befriending many people along the way through their good deeds , and removing Orochi 's curse from the land through defeating other demons that release similar dark presences , all of which float northward . 
 As Amaterasu travels to find the source of these evil spirits , she is brought to the wreckage of a ship able to travel through the stars : the " Ark of Yamato " , trapped in the frozen plains of Kamui . Waka appears and reveals himself as a member of the Moon Tribe , a long @-@ living race who used the Ark to escape from Orochi 's assault on the Celestial Plain and sail from the heavens – unaware of the evil spirits imprisoned on the Ark ; the demons attacked and killed all but Waka himself , resulting in the Ark crashing to earth . Amaterasu enters the Ark , where she defeats all of the demons again , before entering the deepest part of the Ark . Within the bowels , Yami , the demon controlling all the evil spirits , appears and strips the Celestial Brush powers from Amaterasu , before engaging her in battle . Amaterasu also fails to recover her powers from Yami , who destroys the Celestial Gods , destroying her power and leaving her near death . Issun takes up his role as the Celestial Envoy and encourages all those they have helped to send their thoughts and prayers to Amaterasu , causing her to regain her powers and allowing her to destroy Yami , ridding all of the demons from both the Ark and Nippon . Amaterasu and Waka take control on the Ark and sail back to the Celestial Plain . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The player controls Ōkami Amaterasu , the goddess of the sun , in the form of a white wolf . Amaterasu is referred to in the Japanese and European version of the game as a female , while in the North American version she was genderless . While Amaterasu , when endowed with ink power , is seen by the player with red markings , cloud @-@ like fur on her shoulders , and weapons on her back , most of the human characters in the game only see her as a plain white wolf ; some believe Amaterasu to be the reincarnation of Shiranui ( the white wolf that fought Orochi 100 years prior to the game 's present ) , and do not recognize her spiritual nature . If the player depletes their power by overuse of the celestial brush , Amaterasu will temporarily revert to this mundane white form . Issun , an arrogant , inch @-@ tall " wandering artist " seeking out the thirteen Celestial Brush techniques for himself , accompanies Amaterasu ( whom he calls " Ammy " or " <unk> " ) , and serves as a guide , dialogue proxy and as comic relief . He grows in character along with Ammy throughout the game , becoming her true friend , inspiration , and eventually her savior . 
 At the end of the game , Amaterasu encounters Yami , the main antagonist and final boss of the game who resembles a small fish inside a huge sphere , whose design is altered through the different stages of the battle . Yami is also the ruler of the demons . Before battle , he drains Amaterasu of her powers and leaves her as a plain white wolf . Amaterasu regains her powers throughout the fight , but , after the fourth round , Yami destroys them all again and leaves Amaterasu in a near @-@ dead state . However , when Issun gets everyone to believe in Amaterasu before the fifth and final round , she changes into her most powerful form and battles Yami , vanquishing him forever . In the final battle , Yami also has a huge clawed hand , which demonstrates the evil which comes from Humans ' hands . The word ' Yami ' means ' darkness ' in Japanese . 
 Two other characters also reappear several times within the quest . Waka appears to Amaterasu several times in the game as a beautiful young flute @-@ playing man in costume resembling a tengu ( more precisely , a tengu dressed like a yamabushi , which is a frequent tengu appearance ) . He is aware of the goddess 's true identity and foretells her future and at times battles with her . He leads the Tao Troopers whose members Abe and Kamo are based on the two famous <unk> Abe no <unk> and Kamo no Yasunori . Waka 's dialogue , dropping French affectionate terms at times , conveys a sense of familiarity with Amaterasu , as it turns out that Waka is much older than he appears and has walked with Amaterasu on the Celestial Plain hundreds of years ago . The other is Orochi , the eight @-@ headed demon and a major villain within the game which the player will encounter several times . Orochi repeatedly has threatened Kamiki village , demanding a sacrifice of a young woman . Each of its eight heads is infused with a different elemental magic power , but the entire demon is susceptible to a special brew of sake available only at Kamiki Village , allowing Amaterasu to defeat it while in its stupor . Amaterasu trusts Queen Himiko , the ruler of " Sei @-@ an City " who is killed by one of the demons . 
 Throughout the game , the player encounters several other characters that are inspired from Japanese folklore . 
 = = Development = = 
 Ōkami resulted from the combined ideas of Clover Studio . The game was originally built around " depict [ ing ] a lot of nature " , but had no central concept or theme , according to lead designer Hideki Kamiya . Kamiya eventually created a minute @-@ long demonstration movie showing a wolf running about a forest , with flowers blossoming in its wake , but still lacked any gameplay . Kamiya and other members of the team introduced ideas around the nature aspect and eventually led to the game 's initial prototype , which Kamiya admitted was " incredibly boring to play " . Kamiya suggested that he allowed so many ideas from the team that resulted in the development moving off @-@ target , including creating more of a simulation . Eventually , they settled onto the gameplay found in the final product . 
 The art in Ōkami is highly inspired by Japanese watercolor and wood carving art of the Ukiyo @-@ e style , such as the work of Hokusai . Ōkami was originally planned to be rendered in a more photorealistic 3D style . However , Clover Studio determined that the more colorful sumi @-@ e style allowed them to better convey Amaterasu 's association with nature and the task of restoring it . The change was also influenced by limitations in the PS2 hardware to render the photorealistic 3D graphics . As a result of the switch to the watercolor style , the idea of the Celestial Brush came about . Atsushi Inaba , CEO of Clover , noted that " Once we fixed ourselves on a graphical style and got down to the brushwork , we thought ' Wouldn 't it be great if we could somehow get the player involved and participate in this artwork instead of just watching it ? ' That 's how the idea of the Celestial Brush was born " . Original concepts for enemies included the use of dinosaurs , but the designs settled onto more demon @-@ like characters . 
 Amaterasu 's initial designs were aimed to avoid having the character look like " your pet wearing clothing " . The developers had considered having Amaterasu change into a dolphin when in the water and a falcon when jumping off a cliff , but dropped these ideas . Sakuya , designed around a peach motif , was envisioned with what were called " level 2 " and " level 3 " designs where the character would wear less clothing as the story progressed , but the " level 3 " appearance , effectively naked , was vetoed by Inaba . Waka 's character was aimed to be a Tatsunoko @-@ like character , with the hood designed to be reminiscent of those worn by the Gatchaman . Orochi in Japanese mythology is a gigantic creature , so lead character designer <unk> Sawaki designed the back of the demon to include a garden and palace ; this inspired the game designers to include a bell in those structures that would be Orochi 's fatal weakness in the game . 
 The localization team had to translate 1500 pages of text to make sure it made sense in a " native check " , because of lack of plurals in the Japanese language and the large number of characters and conditional conversations that the player could interact with . The team recognized that certain elements of the game would not be recognized by Western audiences , but left enough text and details to allow the players to look up the information for themselves . Only one puzzle in the game had to be changed as it required knowledge of the steps in drawing a kanji character which would be readily known for Japanese audiences ; for the Western release , these steps were demonstrated in the game . The team noted that personalities of characters could be easily conveyed in Japanese text simply by the way sentences were constructed or slurred , a feature that could not directly be applied to localization . Instead , working with Kamiya , the team scripted the localization to either recreate the personality to match the Japanese version , or to create a whole new set of mannerisms for the characters as appropriate . 
 Ōkami was shown at the 2005 E3 Convention , approximately 30 % complete , with a planned release in 2006 . At this point , the game had much of the core gameplay , including the Celestial Brush and the combat system in place . The game was released a year later in 2006 . However , just a few weeks following its release in North America to strong critical reception , Capcom announced the closure of Clover Studio . 
 The Ōkami : Official Complete Works art book was published by Udon in May 2008 . The game was re @-@ released under Sony 's " Greatest Hits " in Japan in August 2008 . 
 = = = Naming and allusions = = = 
 The title of the game is a pun ; the word <unk> ( <unk> ) in Japanese means " wolf " . However , the kanji characters used as the title of this game ( 大神 ) , pronounced identically , mean " great deity " , so the main character is a great wolf deity . The same characters ( 大神 ) are also used to write the full name of the sun goddess Amaterasu @-@ <unk> . The localization team opted to use shorter versions of Japanese names ( for example , a boy named " <unk> " was localized as " Mushi " ) instead of replacing the names with Western @-@ style ones . Issun 's informal name for Amaterasu in the Western translation , " Ammy " , was inspired by Kamiya , and is similar in tone with the Japanese informal name , " <unk> " . 
 Throughout the game , Ōkami includes several references ( in visual effects , animation , or dialogue ) to other Capcom titles such as Viewtiful Joe , which Clover Studios also developed . For example , Mrs. Orange 's technique for making cherry cake parodies Street Fighter 's Akuma 's Shun Goku <unk> , complete with a kanji word displayed on screen with her back @-@ facing the screen . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The music in Ōkami was inspired by classical Japanese works . The final song , played over the credit sequence , " Reset " , is sung by Ayaka <unk> . In May 2006 , Capcom released an official 5 @-@ disc soundtrack for Ōkami in Japan . In the North American and European release , the player can unlock a jukebox to hear the in @-@ game music upon completion of the game . Ōkami won the best score award at the 2007 BAFTA Video Games Awards . 
 Suleputer has also published another album , a piano arrangement , entitled Ōkami Piano Arrange . It was released on 30 March 2007 . Mika <unk> both arranged the 10 songs , and performed it on the piano . 
 The characters ' speech in the game is actually created by scrambling samples of voice actors ' speech , with more emotional lines being created from voice work given in that emotion . 
 = = = Wii port = = = 
 The gameplay function of " drawing " or " painting " strokes on the screen led several journalists and gamers alike to believe that Ōkami would be well @-@ suited for the Nintendo DS or Wii , both of which feature controls capable of creating drawing motions freely . After the game 's release , industry rumors of the game being ported to either console persisted , despite Atsushi Inaba of Clover Studio feeling that Ōkami 's action @-@ based gameplay would not translate well to the console and statements from Capcom that there were " no plans for Ōkami on Wii " . 
 However , at the 2007 UK Gamers Day , Capcom announced that Ready at Dawn would oversee porting and development of a Wii version of Ōkami originally scheduled for release in March 2008 but subsequently pushed back to April 2008 . Christian Svensson , Capcom 's Vice @-@ President of Strategic Planning and Business Development , stated that Capcom had received numerous requests from fans for the development of the Wii version , and that the ported game " specifically exists because of that direct communication , especially those we receive on our message boards ( even if they 're sometimes mean to us ) . " Ready at Dawn president Didier <unk> has stated that , aside from the control scheme , the Wii version will be " an exact port of the PS2 version . " The lack of enhancements for the game caused several complaints from gamers , which Svensson addressed , stating that 
 Svensson reported that the original game assets given to them from Capcom Japan were incomplete , and even after requesting old hard drives and computers to recover more assets , Ready at Dawn was still required to recreate some from scratch . Furthermore , the game had to be recoded to change optimizations that were made for the PlayStation 2 version ; Svensson stated that " part of the reason we didn 't show it until we started showing it was because , if we showed it in a form that was anything less than near @-@ perfect , people were going to freak out " . Ready at Dawn 's creative director Ru Weerasuriya later reflected that porting Ōkami to the Wii was a challenging task — " we started with no assets and literally reverse @-@ engineered the whole thing back onto the Wii " — they did out of love for the game , but the level of effort would preclude them from attempting such a port again . 
 In November 2007 , Svensson noted that the engine had been ported to the Wii , writing that " There are still several systems getting set up properly but there 's most definitely a Wii @-@ driven Amaterasu running around Wii @-@ rendered environments as we speak . " A listing posted at Capcom 's website for the game on 15 February 2008 revealed that the Wii version would support 480p and widescreen output , and IGN confirmed that the motion sensing of the Wii Remote would be used to perform the Celestial Brush features within the game . IGN 's hands @-@ on also cited small changes to the game such as additional motion @-@ sensing controls using both the Wii Remote and Nunchuck attachment , and the ability to skip cutscenes , but reported no other changes in content of the game . 
 <unk> noted that Capcom would not use television advertising for Ōkami on the Wii , but would use online marketing , including art contests and a new website with " all sorts of things for fans to use to make stuff " . This site was made live on 3 April 2008 , featuring wallpapers , character artwork and fan @-@ created art for the game . <unk> further noted that " If [ Ōkami for the Wii ] did the numbers that we did on the PS2 , I 'd be very happy . This doesn 't need to be a mainstream success for this to be a success for the company . " 
 A " paper parchment " filter applied to all on @-@ screen elements that was readily apparent in the PlayStation 2 version was still included in the Wii port , but the effect was made much less significant . To help with drawing with the Celestial Brush , two different buttons on the Wii controllers were given brush functionality ; one button was assigned to provide free @-@ form strokes , while the other was set to draw a straight line from the starting point . 
 The final credits movie that was in the PlayStation 2 version of the game was removed from the Wii version , much to Kamiya 's regret as it removed the omoi — " a combination of thoughts , emotions , and messages " — from the game : " [ The staff roll was ] the omoi of everyone who worked on the project , put together in a moment of bliss held out just for those who completed the journey . It was a special staff roll for a special moment . And now it is gone . All of it . ... It 's incredibly disappointing and sad . " A Capcom representative stated that the credits , a pre @-@ rendered movie , had the Clover Studio logo within it , and they had " no legal right to use the Clover logo in a game they were not involved with directly " . Since they also lacked the source to the credits , they opted to remove them entirely from the game . Ready at Dawn 's co @-@ founder Didier <unk> also claimed that the Wii version of Ōkami took up much more space on the game media than the PlayStation 2 version , and that the movie was cut in order to fit everything on a single game disk , however despite these claims , the credit sequence was restored in the Japanese release of the Wii version and revealed that the port was co @-@ developed by Tose , having provided additional planners , designers , programmers and test players . The images from the credits , although not the credits themselves , are still available as unlockable art . 
 Players have discovered that the cover of the North American Wii version of Ōkami includes a watermark from IGN , and traced the source to an image taken from IGN 's site . To make up for the error , Capcom offered for a limited time to replace the cover with one of three high @-@ resolution covers free of charge to users in North America . Because of delays in fulfilling the offer , Capcom shipped copies of all three covers to those that registered . They have since discontinued the offer , but have made the cover images available worldwide in high @-@ quality PDF files for users to download and print themselves . The European PAL version of the cover has no such error . 
 = = = High @-@ definition remaster = = = 
 In June 2012 , Capcom announced that a high @-@ definition remastering of the game , Ōkami HD ( Ōkami <unk> @-@ ban ; roughly translated , Ōkami Magnificent Version ) , would be released worldwide for PlayStation 3 in October 2012 ; a retail product was released in Japan , while the game is available for download through the PlayStation Network in Europe and North America only . The decision boggled players , considering that the HD Japanese version of the physical copy of the game also came with the English , French and German languages respectively . The remastered edition supports the PlayStation Move peripheral , and Trophy support has been added . The remastering was done between Capcom and HexaDrive , who had previously worked on the high @-@ definition remastering of Rez . 
 = = = Sequel = = = 
 Sales of Ōkami were considered somewhat poor for justifying a sequel ; in July 2009 , in response to users ' questions on the possibility of a sequel , Svensson stated that " I think we need a lot more people buying the current version before we seriously consider a sequel " . However , after the appearance of a Japanese trademark by Capcom on the word " Ōkamiden " a few months before the Wii version of Ōkami in Japan , many speculated that a sequel was pending . The September 2009 issue of Famitsu announced that Ōkamiden was indeed a sequel to Ōkami for the Nintendo DS , to be released by Capcom in Japan in 2010 , though without the input of the Clover staff . The game takes place nine months after the end of Ōkami , with the player in control of <unk> , a wolf puppy with the same powers as Amaterasu , but not yet at his full potential , and features the same style of gameplay , including the Celestial Brush using the DS ' touchscreen controls . 
 At the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2016 during an interview with Metro , Kamiya , now at Platinum Games , stated that he had ideas for Ōkami 2 and Bayonetta 3 , though did not confirm if either game was in active development . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Ōkami was acclaimed by critics , with a score of 92 @.@ 65 % on GameRankings , making it the eighth highest overall game of 2006 and second for the PlayStation 2 , behind Konami 's Metal Gear Solid 3 : Subsistence . 
 GameSpot gave it a 9 out of 10 and selected it as an Editor 's Choice , citing that its " visual design instantly stands out , but it turns out to be just one of many inspired aspects of this impressive action adventure game . " IGN gave the game a 9 @.@ 1 out of 10 , as being " beautiful , charismatic , engaging and one of the most original games you 'll play anytime soon . " Electronic Gaming Monthly 's three reviewers gave it a 9 , 9 @.@ 5 , and 9 out of ten , one saying : " I 'll be surprised if you can find a better game on any system this fall . " Newtype USA named Ōkami its Game of the Month for October 2006 , heralded the pacing as " nearly flawless " and proclaimed " Ōkami is that rarest of beasts : a game without any obvious flaws . Clover 's creativity and attention to detail are on full display here . Shame on any gamer who passes up this divine adventure . " Eurogamer scored the game 10 / 10 saying " Right from the start it conjures an atmosphere of being something special , but to keep that level of quality up consistently over 60 hours ensures that this will be a game that will be talked about for years to come " . In 2007 , Ōkami was named eighteenth best PlayStation 2 game of all time in IGN 's feature reflecting on the PlayStation 2 's long lifespan . Famitsu gave the game a near perfect score of 39 out of 40 , the 15th game to date to receive this score from the publication . 
 However , the game was noted to have some flaws . The game was criticized for its uneven difficulty . Reviewers have also noted some difficulty in getting the game to recognize the correct Celestial Brush patterns , as well as excessive amounts of dialog , particularly at the introduction , which was also hampered by the computer @-@ generated voices used instead of voice acting . 
 The Wii version of Ōkami has received generally similar praise to the PlayStation 2 version , with GameSpot stating that the support for widescreen and the Wii controls " make it even more relevant today than it was in 2006 " . The use of the Wii Remote for the Celestial Brush was well received ; in GameSpot 's review , they noted that the Wii functionality with the Brush " improves the pace of the game " . However , other aspects to the controls were found to be weaker , particularly in combat . In their review , Nintendo Power recommended the PlayStation 2 version of the game over the Wii , stating that " Though you can overcome the drawing and attacking issues with practice ( and by sticking to whip @-@ style weapons ) , it 's a hurdle you shouldn 't have to leap . " The Wii version was given the Game of the Month award from IGN for April 2008 . It was a nominee for multiple awards from IGN in its 2008 video game awards , including Best Artistic Design and Best Use of the Wii @-@ Mote . 
 The high @-@ definition release on the PlayStation 3 was praised for being the " definitive " version of the game , with the rendering in 1080p helping to make the graphics style of the game stand out . Cam Shae of IGN did express some disappointment that the PlayStation 3 version did not attempt to address the " pop up " of far @-@ off objects due to draw distance , a limitation of the PlayStation 2 version . Oli Welsh of Eurogamer considered that the game remains as relevant as it was when it was first released in 2006 , being one of the few video games of the Zelda style . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Ōkami 's initial showing at the 2005 E3 Convention garnered <unk> awards and recognition , including 1UP 's " Best PS2 Game " , " Best Game of Show " ( second place ) , and " Best Action Game " ( third place ) ; IGN 's " Best PS2 Game of Show " , and runner @-@ up for " Best of Show " and " Most Innovative Design " ; and X @-@ Play 's " Most Original Game " . GameSpy recognized it as the fifth best game showing for the convention . 
 Upon release , Ōkami appeared as the " Game of the Month " for IGN , Electronic Gaming Monthly , and Game Informer . IGN , Edge Magazine and Game Revolution rated it as the best overall game of 2006 , while Game Trailers and Official PlayStation Magazine , named it best PS2 game for 2006 . IGN further awarded the game the " Best Overall " and " PS2 Adventure Game " , the " Best Overall " and " PS2 Artistic Design " , the " Overall " and " PS2 Most Innovative Design " , and the " Best Overall Story " . GameSpot awarded the game for the " Best Artistic Graphics " for 2006 . IGN named Ōkami the 19th top game of all time in a 2007 list . In 2010 , GamePro ranked it as the fifth best game for the PlayStation 2 . 
 Ōkami has also won awards from outside the mainstream gaming press . The game earned the " Best Character Design " and only one of three Innovation Awards at the 2007 Game Developers Choice Awards . Ōkami won the Grand Prize in the Entertainment Division of the 2006 Japan Media Arts Festival . On 13 August 2007 . It was also awarded the best " Animation in a Game Engine " , " Art Direction in a Game Engine " , " Outstanding Original Adventure Game " , and " Game of the Year " in the 2006 awards by the National Academy of Video Game Testers and Reviewers ( <unk> ) . Ōkami was given an " Award for Excellence " from the Japanese Computer Entertainment Supplier ’ s Association ( CESA ) at the Japan Game Awards 2007 and was later given 2009 CESA Developers Conference ( <unk> ) award for " Visual Arts " . The game was awarded the " Best Anthropomorphic Video Game " in the 2006 Ursa Major awards . It also won the 2007 BAFTA awards for " Artistic Achievement " and " Original Score " . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Ōkami sold 200 @,@ 000 copies in North America in 2006 , grossing approximately US $ 8 million and ranking as the 100th best selling game of the year in the region . By March 2007 , the total sales of the PlayStation 2 version were near 270 @,@ 000 . By comparison , Ōkami sold 66 @,@ 000 copies in Japan for 2006 . While it was initially thought that poor sales of Ōkami and God Hand ( another Clover title released in the same time frame ) were the cause of the closure of Clover Studio , it was later revealed that three key developers within Capcom and Clover Studios , Shinji Mikami ( Resident Evil series ) , Hideki Kamiya ( Devil May Cry series ) , and Inaba , had left the company , and the studio was dissolved , such that " now all the resources should be used more effectively and more efficiently since they are centralized . " Inaba , Mikami , and Kamiya went on to form the video game development company " Seeds Inc " , later merging with a company called " ODD " to become " Platinum Games " . 
 On 30 July 2008 , Capcom revealed that the Wii version of Ōkami had sold approximately 280 @,@ 000 copies in North America and Europe since its release date . The Wii version debuted in Japan with a modest 24 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week in the region . It was the sixth @-@ bestselling game in Japan on 23 October 2009 . Total sales for the game remained under 600 @,@ 000 total units by March 2009 , and was named the " least commercially successful winner of a game of the year award " in the 2010 version of the Guinness World Records Gamer 's Edition . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Ben Mattes , producer for the 2008 Prince of Persia video game , cited Ōkami as well as Ico and Shadow of the Colossus as influences on the gameplay and artwork for the game . Capcom 's Street Fighter IV is also stated to have character designs influenced by Ōkami with hand @-@ drawn images and brushstroke @-@ like effects . The Disney video game , Epic Mickey , uses similar drawing aspects as Ōkami , allowing the player to draw and modify parts of levels to proceed . The final boss , Yami , appears as the main antagonist and final boss in the crossover fighting game , Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Ultimate All @-@ Stars . Amaterasu appears as a playable character in Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds and Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 . After Clover 's dissolution and most of its staff 's subsequent reformation as Platinum Games , one of their next games , Bayonetta , contains several references to Ōkami ; the most notable of these is when the title character transforms into a panther and , like Amaterasu , a trail of flowers and plant life follows her . For the 2010 San Diego Comic Con , Capcom raffled a limited run of T @-@ shirts designed by Gerald de Jesus and iam8bit that placed Amaterasu and <unk> ( from Ōkamiden ) into a homage to the Three Wolf Moon t @-@ shirt . 
 In 2009 , GamesRadar included Okami among the games " with untapped franchise potential " , commenting : " Seriously , if Nintendo can make the same Zelda game every few years , then why can 't Capcom release Ōkami 2 ? " . In 2015 , Amaterasu was featured in Archie Comics ' Worlds Unite crossover between its Sonic the Hedgehog comic lines and Mega Man series . An Ōkami costume was included in Monster Hunter Generations . 
 = Eccles , Greater Manchester = 
 Eccles ( / <unk> / ; pop . 38 @,@ 756 ( 2011 ) ) is a town in Greater Manchester , England , 2 @.@ 7 miles ( 4 @.@ 3 km ) west of Salford and 3 @.@ 7 miles ( 6 @.@ 0 km ) west of Manchester city centre , between the M602 motorway to the north and the Manchester Ship Canal to the south . 
 Historically part of Lancashire , Eccles grew up around the 13th century Parish Church of St Mary . Evidence of pre @-@ historic human settlement has been discovered locally but the area was predominantly agricultural until the Industrial Revolution , when a textile industry was established in the town . The arrival of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway , the world 's first passenger railway , led to the town 's expansion along the route of the track linking those two cities . 
 Eccles cakes , first produced and sold in the town in 1793 , are now exported across the world . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 The derivation of the name is uncertain , but several ideas have been proposed . One is that the " Eccles " place – name is derived from the Romano @-@ British Ecles or <unk> , itself derived from the Ancient Greek Ecclesia . Following the arrival in AD 613 of the invading Anglo @-@ Saxons at Lancashire , many existing British place – names , especially rivers and hills ( the River Irwell for example ) , survived intact . The root " Ecles " , found in several village names , is an exception to this . A popular theory is that the word denoted the site of a building recognised by the Anglo @-@ Saxons as a church and feature of the landscape . Eccles appears to have been such a village , and Ecles may be the likely source of the modern name . In Kenyon 's " Origins of Lancashire " ( 1991 ) however the author suggests that this may not be the case as there is not an exact correlation between " Eccles " place – names and pre @-@ Domesday hundreds in south Lancashire . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Pre @-@ historic finds in the parish of Eccles include dugout boats found at Barton @-@ upon @-@ Irwell , an arrowhead , a spear and axes at Winton , which taken together appear to suggest the existence of a hunting and travelling society . Human habitation in the area may extend as far back as 6000 BC , with two separate periods of settlement on Chat Moss , the first around 500 BC and the second during the Romano @-@ British period . 
 The village may have been founded by refugees from Manchester ( Mamucium ) during the Diocletianic Persecution in the early 4th century , although excavations in 2001 – 05 revealed that the civilian settlement at Manchester had probably been abandoned by the mid @-@ 3rd century . Throughout the Dark Ages the parish appears to have been remote enough to be untouched by any local conflicts , while absorbing successive waves of immigrants from nearby towns . 
 The Manor of Barton @-@ upon @-@ Irwell once covered a large area ; in 1276 it included townships such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Eccles , <unk> , Withington ( latterly Winton ) , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Swinton . Before this date it would appear to have been even larger , but by 1320 the manor boundaries were described as " <unk> <unk> descending to <unk> , then to the pit near <unk> <unk> and then to another pit , then to the ditch of Roger the Clerk , then to the hedge of Richard the <unk> , then following the hedge to <unk> . " The manor was originally controlled by the Barton family until about 1292 when by marriage it came into the ownership of the Booth family , who retained it for almost 300 years . In 1586 the Trafford family assumed control of the manor , and established themselves in 1632 at <unk> , which was renamed Trafford Park . 
 The parish of Eccles contained the townships of Barton @-@ upon @-@ Irwell , Clifton , Pendlebury , Pendleton and Worsley . Toward the end of the Middle Ages the parish had an estimated population of about 4 @,@ 000 <unk> . Agriculture remained an important local industry , with little change from the Medieval system due to a lack of adequate drainage and fertiliser . No evidence exists to demonstrate the layout of the area , but it would likely have been the same as the surrounding areas of Salford , Urmston and Warrington where oats and barley would have been grown . Local cottage industries included blacksmiths , butchers , thatching , basket weaving , skinning and tanning . Weaving was popular , using linen and wool . Merchants traded in corn and badgers bought and sold local produce . 
 Although the local gentry supported the Royalists , the English Civil War had little effect on the area . Troops would occasionally pass through the parish and there was a skirmish at <unk> , but the only other mention of local involvement was the burial of two ( probably ) local soldiers in 1643 . The Jacobite army passed through in 1745 , in its advance and subsequent retreat . 
 = = = Textiles and the Industrial Revolution = = = 
 In 1795 John Aikin described the area : 
 The agriculture of the parish is chiefly confined to grazing , and would be more materially benefited by draining ; but the tax upon brick , a most essential article in this process , has been a very great hindrance to it . The use of lime — imported from Wales , and brought by the inland navigations to the neighbourhood of our collieries — has become very general in the improvement of the meadow and pasture lands . 
 During the 18th century the predominance of textiles in the region is partly demonstrated in the parish registers of 1807 , which show that 46 children were baptised with 34 fathers employed as weavers . In Memoirs of seventy years of an eventful life ( 1852 ) Charles Hulbert wrote : 
 The principal employment of the working population of Eccles and vicinity at that time , was the manufacture of Cotton Goods on the home or domestic plan . These were not then , according to my present recollection , more than two Spinning <unk> in Manchester , Arkwright 's with its loft chimney , and Douglas 's extensive Works , on the River Irwell , near the Broken bank ... At the period of my first residence in Eccles Parish , I believe the above Mills chiefly supplied the Weavers of Eccles and other parishes with twist for warps , which were purchased by the Master Manufacturers . 
 During the early 19th century the growth of industry meant the majority of the area 's inhabitants were employed in textiles or trade , while a minority worked in agriculture . The factory system was also introduced ; in 1835 1 @,@ 124 people were employed in cotton mills , and two mills used power looms . Local hand @-@ produced specialities included striped cotton ticks , checks , <unk> and <unk> . Two cotton mills are visible on the 1845 Ordnance Survey map of the area . The area also became renowned for its production of silk , with two mills at Eccles and one at Patricroft . Many factory workers were children under 12 years of age . 
 In 1830 James Nasmyth ( son of Alexander Nasmyth ) visited the newly opened Liverpool and Manchester Railway , and on his return to Manchester noted the suitability of a site alongside the canal at Patricroft for an engineering works . He and his brother leased the land from Thomas de Trafford , and established the Bridgewater Foundry in 1836 . The foundry was completed the following year with a design based upon assembly line production . In 1839 Nasmyth invented the Steam Hammer , which enabled the manufacture of forgings at a scale and speed not seen before . In the same year the foundry started to manufacture railway locomotives , with 109 built by 1853 . Nasmyth died a wealthy man in 1890 . 
 The Eccles Spinning and Manufacturing Company came into being following a meeting called by the Mayor of Eccles , in which concern was expressed at the decline in local industry . Two earlier Eccles mills had been destroyed by fire , resulting in significant local unemployment . Designed by Potts , Son and Hennings of Manchester , Bolton and Oldham , it was opened in 1906 . The imposing mill contained a multi @-@ storey spinning mill , engine house and extensive weaving sheds . 
 Early housing in the village consisted of groups of thatched cottages clustered around and near the parish church . The influx of workers from areas around the village accompanied an increased demand for extra housing . Even after the establishment of the local board of health new properties were often built in the gardens of existing dwellings , leading to severe overcrowding . In 1852 the streets were paved with boulders , sewerage was non @-@ existent , and water supply was a local well . During the latter half of the 19th century new housing was erected alongside the railway , and large areas of open land were soon occupied with new housing estates built for the area 's more wealthy residents . 
 The construction of the Manchester Ship Canal provided many local residents with jobs . 1 @,@ 888 people were employed on the section of the new canal at Barton . A stone aqueduct over the River <unk> dating from 1761 and designed by James Brindley was demolished and replaced by a new moveable aqueduct : the Barton Swing Aqueduct . 
 = = = Post @-@ industrial history = = = 
 Eccles was not immune to the general decline of the textile industry in the 20th century . The Bridgewater Foundry ceased operations in 1940 , taken over by the Ministry of Supply and converted into a Royal Ordnance Factory . The factory closed in the late 1980s , and is now part of the Nasmyth Business Centre . 
 Eccles is included in the City of Salford 's Unitary Development Plan 2004 – 2016 as part of the western gateway , a major focus for economic development during the plan period . Areas to be developed include the Barton Strategic Regional Site , Dock 9 at Salford Quays , Weaste Quarry near Eccles , and remaining land at Northbank , and the plan provides for improvements which include the A57 – Trafford Park link at Barton and provisional support for a further expansion of the Metrolink system through the area and a link between the A57 and M62 at Barton . Under this plan the town 's retail environment would also be maintained and enhanced . 
 = = Governance = = 
 In 1854 the Barton , Eccles , Winton and Monton Local Board of Health was established for the northern part of the township of Barton . Eccles was incorporated as a municipal borough in 1892 , part of which was in Barton poor law union , an inter @-@ parish unit established to provide social security , and in 1933 this was expanded to include most of Barton Moss civil parish , and part of Worsley Urban District . A small part of the borough was transferred in 1961 to the County Borough of Salford . In 1974 the borough was abolished and its area transferred to Greater Manchester to form part of the City of Salford . 
 The Eccles area incorporates the wards of Barton , Winton , and Eccles . 
 Following its review of parliamentary representation in Greater Manchester , the Boundary Commission for England recommended that Eccles be split between two new constituencies ; Salford and Eccles , from the existing Salford constituency and the central / eastern part of Eccles , and Worsley and Eccles South , from the existing Worsley constituency and the southern / western part of Eccles . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Eccles is situated 4 ¾ miles west of Manchester , on the north bank of the Manchester Ship Canal . The area is along a gentle slope from 160 feet ( 49 m ) above sea level to the north , to 60 feet ( 18 m ) above sea at the south , near the Irwell . The underlying geology is made up of New Red Sandstone and pebble beds . The coal measures of the Lancashire coalfield extend south to Monton and Winton . On the surface deposits of clay and loose sands are prevalent throughout the area , along with vegetable moulds formed by rotted vegetation from the previous ice age . These areas have , when drained , provided fertile soil for local agriculture , benefited by the 19th century practice of dumping <unk> from nearby Manchester . 
 Parts of the area are within an indicated floodplain . Eccles ' climate is generally temperate , like the rest of Greater Manchester . The mean highest and lowest temperatures ( 13 @.@ 2 ° C ( 55 @.@ 8 ° F ) and 6 @.@ 4 ° C ( 43 @.@ 5 ° F ) ) are slightly above the national average , while the annual rainfall ( 806 @.@ 6 millimetres ( 31 @.@ 76 in ) ) and average hours of sunshine ( 1394 @.@ 5 hours ) are respectively above and below the national averages . 
 = = Demography = = 
 = = = Overall = = = 
 At the time of the United Kingdom Census 2001 , according to the Office for National Statistics , the Urban Sub @-@ division of Eccles was part of the Greater Manchester Urban Area and had a total resident population of 36 @,@ 610 , of which 17 @,@ 924 ( 48 @.@ 96 % ) were male and 18 @,@ 686 ( 51 @.@ 04 % ) were female . The settlement occupied 812 hectares , compared with 783 in the 1991 census . Its population density was 45 @.@ 09 people per hectare compared with an average of 40 @.@ 20 across the Greater Manchester Urban Area . The median age of the population is 37 , compared with 36 within the Greater Manchester Urban Area and 37 across England and Wales . 
 The majority of the population of Eccles was born in England ( 91 @.@ 94 % ) ; 2 @.@ 61 % were born elsewhere within the United Kingdom , 0 @.@ 70 % within the rest of the European Union , and 2 @.@ 99 % elsewhere in the world . 
 Data on religious beliefs across the town in the 2001 census show that 77 @.@ 07 % declared themselves to be Christian , 12 @.@ 05 % said they held no religion , and 2 @.@ 26 % reported themselves as Muslim . 
 Eccles is within the Manchester Larger Urban Zone , and the Manchester Travel to Work Area . 
 = = = By ward = = = 
 The Eccles area consists of the wards of Barton , Winton , and Eccles . 
 According to the Office for National Statistics , at the time of the United Kingdom Census 2001 , the ward of Eccles had a population of 11 @,@ 413 , of which 5 @,@ 546 were male , and 5 @,@ 867 female . The ward of Winton had a population of 12 @,@ 752 , and the ward of Barton had a population of 10 @,@ 434 , giving the larger administrative area of Eccles a total population of 34 @,@ 599 . 
 Eccles is the ninth most densely populated ward in Salford , and has the highest number and proportion of people aged 75 and over of all wards in Salford . Levels of crime are below the average for the city . The adult population tends to be more qualified than the city average , and primary and secondary education results are also slightly higher than average for Salford . Unemployment is below average , with people tending to work longer hours . More residents live in purpose @-@ built and converted flats than do in the city as a whole , with a minority occupying detached houses or bungalows . Between 1994 and 2004 , 367 homes were added to the ward , above the average for Salford . 
 Neighbouring Winton is the sixth most densely populated ward in the region and in 2001 had proportionally more children than the city as a whole . Crime is generally below average , with falling rates of burglary in 2005 . Education standards for both adults and children are below city average with minor improvements to GCSE results between 2005 and 2006 . Unemployment is higher than average for Salford , with areas of severe income deprivation both to the north and south of the ward . Residents are on average more likely to live in semi @-@ detached housing , with 208 homes added between 1994 and 2004 . 
 To the south , the ward of Barton is the third most densely populated in Salford with little population change between 1991 and 2001 . It has proportionally more over @-@ 85 @-@ year olds than the city as a whole , with low adult and primary school education standards , but significant improvements in GCSE results of late . Some parts of Barton are amongst the worst 20 % of areas in the country for child poverty , with below city @-@ average childcare provision . Unemployment is higher than average for Salford . Almost half the homes in the ward are terraced housing , with an extra 300 properties built between 1994 and 2004 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 To the east of the town centre , the West One retail park was opened in November 2001 at a cost of £ <unk> . It is in competition with the nearby Trafford Centre and Lowry Outlet Mall , and as a result has suffered a loss of trade . Most of its units were abandoned but following the decision by Tesco to scrap plans for a £ 30m Tesco Extra store in 2013 a number of new openings have improved the retail offering ; The Range , Home Bargains and <unk> Toys Superstore . A Morrisons supermarket is near the town centre , 
 Until shortly after its closure was announced on 9 May 2006 , the Great Universal Stores group used the former Eccles Spinning and Manufacturing Company building in Winton . Operations have since been transferred to a site in Shaw and Crompton . The town still has a manufacturing industry . <unk> Chemicals , a leading chemical additive supplier and its predecessors have occupied a site on <unk> Way since 1937 , the Global HQ in Eccles employs more than 100 people working in manufacturing , research , administrative and business management roles . <unk> Europe manufactures colouring for plastics and nylon fibres , employing 75 staff with a turnover of £ 10M . The Eccles @-@ based insurance broker and financial services specialist CBG Group , which worldwide employs 180 people , has its head office near the town centre . The employment agency <unk> Group has its headquarters in Eccles and supplies thousands of employees to various hi @-@ tech employers . 
 = = = Population = = = 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The Parish Church of St Mary the Virgin is the only Grade I Listed building in Eccles . There are two Grade II * listed buildings in the Eccles area . The Church of St Andrew was completed by the architect Herbert Edward Tijou in 1879 . Monton Unitarian Church was completed in 1875 by Thomas Worthington . 
 The town 's war memorial was erected in 1925 . Local sculptor John Cassidy was commissioned to design the structure . Built from Portland stone and topped with a bronze figure , it was unveiled by Lord Derby in August 1925 . It is now a Grade II listed building . Eccles Library was built on a slum clearance site in the town centre . The building was funded by Andrew Carnegie and designed by Edward Potts ( who also designed the canalside mill picture above ) , and opened on 19 October 1907 . Designed in the Renaissance style , it is now a Grade II listed building . Potts had hoped that the building would become " the Eccles University " . 
 Salford City Council is currently bidding for the Liverpool and Manchester Railway to be included in UNESCO 's list of World Heritage Sites . Eccles railway station has recently undergone restoration work by the Friends of Eccles Railway Station , including clean @-@ ups , renovation of the station garden , and a mural . Both Monton Green and Ellesmere Park are designated conservation areas , and a Site of Biological Importance is located near Rutland Road and Chatsworth Road . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The Salford to Warrington turnpike trust was formed in 1752 and assumed control of the road from Pendleton to Irlam . Opinions as to the quality of the road were mainly negative ; writing in 1795 , John Aikin said " Much Labour and a very great expense of money have been expended on the roads of this parish , but they still remain in a very indifferent state , and from one plain and obvious cause , the immoderate weights drawn in carts and waggons . " On the poor quality roads , the Liverpool to Manchester stagecoach took almost an entire day to make the journey . Matters appear to have improved by the 19th century , along with the opening of several more trust roads throughout the parish . In the early part of the 19th century some existing routes were widened and straightened , including the modern @-@ day Regent Road in Salford . All the roads except one were surfaced with boulders . In 1832 a daily omnibus service from Manchester reached Eccles and Pendleton . In 1877 , following the laying of tracks in the road , horse @-@ drawn trams were used ; these eventually gave way in 1902 to electric trams under the control of the Salford Corporation . Motorised buses were introduced in 1938 . 
 The opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway on 15 September 1830 was a pivotal moment in transport history . The world 's first railway constructed to carry passengers as well as freight , it signalled the beginning of the end for both the turnpike trusts and the canal system . Stagecoach services ceased as passengers started to use the faster railway . The opening day was historic for more than one reason though ; Eccles became a part of an early railway accident . During a stop at Parkside railway station near Newton @-@ le @-@ Willows , Member of Parliament for Liverpool William Huskisson was seriously injured by an approaching locomotive . He was taken to the vicarage in Eccles for treatment , but died of his injuries . There have been two further serious railway incidents in Eccles , the first in 1941 , and the second in 1984 . The line was widened in 1882 , and improvements were made to the station infrastructure , however in 1971 a fire destroyed the wooden station building , which has never been rebuilt . 
 The Tyldesley Loopline was opened by the London and North Western Railway on 1 September 1864 with stations at Monton Green ( opened 1887 ) , Worsley , Tyldesley , and Leigh . The railway provided a link between Eccles ( located on the existing Liverpool and Manchester line ) , and Wigan . In 1870 an additional branch line from this , the Roe Green Loopline , was opened to Bolton to support the surrounding collieries , the largest of which was at Mosley Common . The London and North Western Railway also built a line from Patricroft railway station to Molyneux Junction , via Clifton Hall Tunnel ( built in 1849 ) . The line connected with the East Lancashire Railway to Radcliffe and Bury . Clifton Hall Tunnel collapsed on 28 April 1953 . The Tyldesley Loopline was closed on 5 May 1969 under the Beeching axe , and the closure of the Roe Green branch line followed in October 1969 . 
 In 1851 the Earl of Ellesmere hosted a visit to Manchester by Queen Victoria and Prince Albert . They stayed at Worsley Hall , with a view of the canal , and were given a trip between Patricroft railway station and Worsley Hall , on state barges . Large crowds had gathered to cheer the royal party , which apparently frightened the horses drawing the barge so much that they fell into the canal . 
 The M602 motorway was opened throughout on 3 November 1971 . The Borough Council had previously formed the Eccles Borough Council 's General Purposes Committee , which from December 1962 began to purchase land for the route of the new road , while overseeing a powerful public relations scheme . A demolition programme commenced in January 1967 , with some residents re @-@ housed in newly built housing stock . The council also had to arrange for the purchase of land at the interchange with the present @-@ day M60 , and to re @-@ route part of the Thirlmere Aqueduct . Construction began on 8 December 1969 , along a route limited by the existence of housing estates , the Liverpool and Manchester Railway , the M62 junction at Worsley , and the Bridgewater Canal . Consideration was given to the route of the disused Eccles @-@ Tyldesley @-@ Wigan railway line ; the height of the motorway was lowered to accommodate a new railway bridge in case the line was ever re @-@ instated . The nearby bridge for the Clifton Junction branch railway was demolished with explosives . 
 In addition to the Liverpool and Manchester Railway , the town is now served by the Eccles Line of the Metrolink light rail system which , along with regular bus services , terminates at Eccles Interchange . Work on the Metrolink branch to Eccles began in July 1997 and was completed by July 2000 , with the official opening ceremony in January 2001 ; trams leave every twelve minutes . 
 = = Education = = 
 One of the early schools in Eccles was the 18th century day school in the parish of St. Mary 's , south of the Irwell on the de Trafford estate . A Catholic Sunday school was opened in Eccles during the 19th century , in a building in Back Timothy Street ( now the location of Eccles Library ) . Another Day School was also opened in cottages on Barton Lane . The first substantial school in the area however was opened in 1851 along Church Street . A Boy 's School was opened in 1888 . 
 St Patrick 's RC High School is currently the best performing secondary school in Salford , with one of the highest scores in England . The Eccles area contains a number of primary and secondary schools , including ( but not limited to ) St. Mary 's R.C. Primary School , <unk> Preparatory School , New Park High School , and Monton Green Primary School . 
 Eccles College is a further education college . It opened in 1973 and provides a wide range of A @-@ level and vocational course for school @-@ leavers . 
 = = Religion = = 
 As the population of Eccles increased during the Industrial Revolution the medieval parish of Eccles was gradually divided into smaller parishes , and surrounding townships gained their own churches . Roman Catholics living in Eccles originally attended worship at a chapel on the de Trafford estate , south of the Irwell , however the chapel was demolished and replaced by All Saints Church . The first Rector of the Roman Catholic Parish of Eccles parish was , from 1879 , a Father <unk> . The first public Catholic procession in Eccles since the Reformation of the 1530s took place on 18 August 1889 . 
 The Grade II * listed St Andrew 's church in St Andrew 's Parish was built in the 1870s and opened in 1879 ( the tower was added in 1889 ) . Over the next 40 years various decorative improvements were made to the building , including stone carvings , stained glass , and wall paintings ( covered in 1965 ) . Four months after the church was consecrated a church school was opened , the forerunner of the present St Andrew 's Primary School . A second school in Monton ( then part of the parish ) opened in 1881 . In 1912 Monton became a separate parish with its own church , St Paul 's . 
 The area has a variety of other churches , including the Church of St James at nearby Hope , and a Baptist church , Other denominations catered for include Methodist New Connexion , Zion Methodist New Connexion , and Wesleyan . 
 = = Sports = = 
 The amateur rugby league club Salford City Roosters , formerly known as the Eccles Roosters , are based in Eccles . 
 Eccles Rugby Football Club ( rugby union ) is on the inside of the circular M60 motorway , south of the railway . The club 's first registration as a member of the Lancashire County Rugby Football Union was in 1886 . To the west of Eccles lies the City of Salford Stadium , along with new transport infrastructure around the motorway and Trafford Centre . Immediately west of the new stadium site is <unk> Park Golf Club , an 18 @-@ hole par 72 parkland course with floodlit driving range . 
 Eccles is home to City of Salford Volleyball Club https : / / <unk> / site / <unk> / home One of English volleyball 's premier women 's teams , the club competes in Volleyball England 's Women 's <unk> 's competition as well as having a number of development teams 
 = = Public services = = 
 Eccles became the first municipal corporation in England to operate a motorised fire engine in 1901 . It was supplied to Eccles Corporation by a local firm , the Protector Lamp and Lighting Co . , also known for manufacturing Miners ' Safety Lamps . Barton Aerodrome , the first municipal aerodrome in the UK to be licensed by the Air Ministry , was opened on 29 January 1930 on a site at Barton @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Moss . 
 The first Power Station in Eccles was built along Cawdor Street , and opened on 14 December 1896 by Alderman W. D. Kendall . The second and much larger Barton Power Station was built in 1920 alongside the Manchester Ship Canal and Bridgewater Canal . It was opened on 11 October 1923 by the Earl of Derby , and supplied electricity to Manchester and the South East Lancashire Electricity District . It ceased generation in March 1974 , operating from thereon only as a switching station , and was demolished in June 1979 . 
 Salford Royal hospital opened in 1882 as the Salford Union Infirmary , a hospital for sick paupers , in association with the union workhouse . It was later renamed as Hope Hospital , taking the name of the nearby medieval Hope Hall , demolished in 1956 . The hospital was given its current name in 2007 . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Edward Potts was a renowned architect born on 2 March 1839 in Bury . He moved to Oldham and designed many of the town 's mills and was ranked with P. S. Stott as the greatest mill architect of Victorian Lancashire . He moved to Eccles in 1891 and was responsible for the design of the town 's library . He was a Liberal member of the borough council from 1902 to 1905 , the first chairman of the town 's library committee ( 1904 ) , and a Justice of the Peace in 1906 . He inaugurated popular Saturday @-@ night concerts during the winter months and , keen to reduce the incidence of infant mortality , gave a sovereign to the mother of every child who reached the age of one . He died on 15 April 1909 and was buried at Chadderton Cemetery . 
 The hymn @-@ writer William Cooke was born in Eccles in 1821 . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Eccles is perhaps best known for the Eccles cake . Dating from the 18th century , they were first sold from a shop owned by James Birch in 1793 . Traditionally made in the town from a recipe of flaky pastry , butter , nutmeg , candied peel , sugar and currants , they are sold across the country and exported across the world . They are sometimes referred to as " dead fly pies " . 
 Eccles Wakes ( a holiday to celebrate the dedication of the Parish Church ) were celebrated annually until 1877 , when the tradition was abolished by the Home Secretary . 
 = Our Man Bashir = 
 " Our Man Bashir " is the 82nd episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Deep Space Nine , the tenth of the fourth season . It originally aired on November 27 , 1995 @.@ in broadcast syndication . Directed by Winrich Kolbe , the story originated from a pitch by Assistant Script Coordinator Robert Gillan and was turned into a script by producer Ronald D. Moore . Both hairdressing in the episode and the score by Jay Chattaway were later nominated for Emmy Awards . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures on Deep Space Nine , a space station located near a stable wormhole between the Alpha and Gamma quadrants of the Milky Way Galaxy . In this episode , Dr. Julian Bashir ( Alexander Siddig ) plays a 1960s secret agent alongside Garak ( Andrew Robinson ) in a holosuite . After a transporter accident makes several other crew members appear as characters in the program , the duo must prevent any of them from dying in the game or else they will be killed in real life . 
 The production team deliberately avoided holodeck malfunction related episodes as they felt they had been overused on Star Trek : The Next Generation . However , Gillian pitched the circumstances that caused the issue seen in the episode and Moore came up with the 1960s setting . One of the influences for the episode was the James Bond films , which was also raised by several reviewers . This obvious influence resulted in Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer contacting the studio and the later references to it in the episode " A Simple Investigation " were toned down . " Our Man Bashir " received Nielsen ratings of 6 @.@ 8 percent , and while the episode was mostly praised by reviewers with particular attention paid to the performance of Avery Brooks , there was some criticism levelled at the depiction of women . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dr. Julian Bashir ( Alexander Siddig ) is in the holosuite playing a secret agent program in the 1960s . Elim Garak ( Andrew Robinson ) intrudes and convinces Bashir to let him tag along . Meanwhile , Captain Benjamin Sisko ( Avery Brooks ) , Lt Cmdr. Worf ( Michael Dorn ) , Lt. Cmdr. Jadzia Dax ( Terry Farrell ) , Major Kira Nerys ( Nana Visitor ) , and Chief Petty Officer Miles O 'Brien ( Colm Meaney ) are on a runabout , returning to Deep Space Nine . As they arrive they find that their vessel has been sabotaged and that a warp core breach is imminent . Lt. Cmdr. Michael Eddington beams them out , but the ship is destroyed during transport and Eddington is forced to store their patterns while he repairs the transporter , but doing so uses almost all of the station 's memory , putting many station systems off @-@ line . Their physical patterns end up in the computer controlling the holosuite , where they appear as characters in Bashir 's program . 
 Bashir is startled to see Kira appear as a Russian spy , who introduces herself as Colonel Anastasia Komananov , KGB . She has no idea who Major Kira is . Eddington informs Bashir and Garak that they can 't shut down the program or let the characters die or else they will lose the patterns of the other crew members . Komananov explains that a scientist called Dr. Noah is planning to take over the world using lasers to cut into the Earth 's crust resulting in the shrinking of the tectonic plates sinking and causing global flooding . Bashir 's orders are to rescue Professor Honey Bare ( Dax ) from Noah . Falcon ( O 'Brien ) attempts to assassinate Bashir , who must stop Komananov from killing him or else O 'Brien 's pattern will be lost . Bashir , Garak and Komananov go to a casino in Paris to speak to <unk> ( Worf ) , an associate of Noah . Bashir manages to buy his way into a meeting with Noah after winning the money at cards but the trio are knocked out by <unk> using a powdered drug . 
 They awake in Dr. Noah 's lair at the pinnacle of Mount Everest . Noah ( Sisko ) enters and gives a monologue about how he will destroy the world , and shows a big red button he will push to do it . He has Bashir and Garak taken below ground , where they are handcuffed to a laser . As the time ticks down before the laser is activated , Bare performs a final check of the laser . Bashir flirts for her , and she slips him a key and hurries out . Bashir unlocks himself and Garak , who protests that it is too dangerous to continue as the safeties are turned off in the program which could result in their deaths . Garak is about to close the program and kill the other crew members when Bashir shoots him , grazing him with a bullet . Garak is shocked , but impressed and agrees to continue the programme . Bashir is concerned as he knows the program will end with either the death of Professor Bare or Colonel Komananov following the defeat of Noah . 
 The duo burst into Noah 's study and Bashir hits the button to activate the lasers around the world . The room 's occupants gasp as they realize he just annihilated the entire population of Earth except for the top of Mount Everest . Dr. Noah is not prepared to spare Bashir , and just as he is about to execute Bashir , Eddington is able to transfer the crew 's patterns into the computers aboard the USS Defiant . They are then simply beamed aboard , returning to their normal selves . In the holosuite , Bashir and Garak end the program with relief : Bashir " saved the day " by " destroying the world " , Garak notes ; Bashir jibes Garak that they never taught him that in the Obsidian Order . 
 = = Production = = 
 Story editor René Echevarria was keen not to have a damaged holodeck story appear , as he felt it had been overdone in Star Trek : The Next Generation . It was specified in the information sheet sent to freelance writers that Deep Space Nine was not accepting stories involving malfunctioning <unk> . Producer Ira Steven Behr explained that the show had been looking for a unique holodeck story that would be specifically for Deep Space Nine rather than Sherlock Holmes and Dixon Hill detective stories seen in The Next Generation . Whilst Bashir and O 'Brien 's adventures in the holosuites in the Battle of Britain and the Battle of Bannockburn have been mentioned in episodes , they were simply too expensive to be shown on screen effectively . But Behr felt that the story for " Our Man Bashir " was within the budget of the show . 
 The story was initially pitched to Echevarria by Robert Gillan , who was on the staff of Deep Space Nine as Assistant Script Coordinator . Echevarria was immediately convinced , and told Behr about the story who was equally as enthusiastic . In Gillan 's original pitch , there wasn 't a specific setting clearly set out , but Behr and Echevarria were sold on the idea that nothing went wrong with the holosuites — it was simply where the computer decided to store the information following a transporter accident . Producer Ronald D. Moore came up with the 1960s setting , as he felt it was appropriate since Garak was a spy for the Cardassian Obsidian Order . He wrote the teleplay , and based it on a variety of sources including James Bond , Our Man Flint , The Man from U.N.C.L.E. and The Wild Wild West . He later explained that he " loved all of them as a kid . They had a certain panache . I loved writing that episode . " 
 Some of the elements were suggested by other staff members , with Robert Wolfe naming Colonel Anastasia Komananov and Behr changing Suzie <unk> to Mona <unk> . Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer was later not pleased with the James Bond @-@ style approach , and when Bashir 's spy program appeared in the later episode " A Simple Investigation " , the references were more generic . Dennis Madalone managed to save some time during the production as one of the shots involved Bashir seeing Falcon approach him from behind by seeing his reflection in a bottle of champagne . After time was already scheduled to attempt the shot , Madalone explained to the director that he could take the filmed sequence and digitally manipulate it onto the bottle . Madalone was also responsible for firing a cork from a bottle at Colm Meaney 's head from off screen to make it appear as if Bashir did it , and managed to do it on the first take . 
 " Our Man Bashir " was the longest shoot of any single episode of Deep Space Nine , taking nine days to film instead of the normal seven . The episode required a great deal of stunt work and special equipment , such as stuntmen going through tempered glass instead of sugar glass because of the better glass breaking effect . There was a great deal of new sets used as well , which each took longer to set up camera and lighting for as the crew were not as familiar with them as the standing sets . The backdrop used for Mount Everest was rented , but the crew realised it lacked snow so they had to modify it and then return it to the original condition afterwards . The majority of the 1960s style technologies such as Dr. Noah 's base , were all custom built in house and where parts moved they were generally manually operated off screen . Art director Herman Zimmerman said that " Everything that could be manually operated was , because the brain is still smarter than most computers and you can still do some things faster by hand . " 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Our Man Bashir " was first broadcast on November 27 , 1995 in broadcast syndication . It received Nielsen ratings of 6 @.@ 8 percent , placing it in eighth place in its timeslot and lower than the episode that aired the previous week , " The Sword of Kahless " , which gained a rating of 6 @.@ 9 percent . " Our Man Bashir " was the final new episode of Deep Space Nine to air in 1995 , with repeats running until " Homefront " aired on January 1 , 1996 with ratings of 6 @.@ 8 percent . The episode was nominated for two Emmy Awards , one for the score by Jay Chattaway and another for hairdressing in a television episode . 
 Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club compared " Our Man Bashir " to " Little Green Men " from earlier in the season , saying that this episode was " better paced " . Another comparison made was to The Next Generation 's " Hollow Pursuits " , saying that " instead of [ Reginald ] Barclay using the holodeck to enact his fantasies with people he can 't bear to deal with in real life , Bashir is forced to keep his made up world going if he wants to save the lives of his friends " . Handlen also praised the relationship between Bashir and Garak in the episode , and said " Our Man Bashir " demonstrates their characterisation . In Michelle Erica Green 's review for TrekNation , she criticised the role of women in the episode , saying that they fared better in the James Bond movies . She also thought that taking the out @-@ of @-@ character element of the episode repeated elements seen in several episodes during the previous season , but praised the acting on the part of Avery Brooks and that Garak was " born to play a Bond sidekick " . 
 Keith DeCandido , writing for Tor.com , said that it was obvious that the actors enjoyed their new parts in this episode and said of the episode , " holy crap is it fun " . In particular , he praised both Avery Brooks and Nana Visitor in their Bond @-@ esque roles , saying that Brooks made a villain on par with those played by Donald Pleasence , Christopher Lee , and Javier Bardem . DeCandido gave " Our Man Bashir " a rating of nine out of ten . In a list of the top 100 episodes of the Star Trek franchise , " Our Man Bashir " was placed in 77th place by Charlie Jane Anders at io9 . 
 The first home media release of " Our Man Bashir " was as a two @-@ episode VHS cassette alongside " The Sword of Kahless " in the United Kingdom on June 13 , 1996 , followed in the United States and Canada by a single @-@ episode release on October 3 , 2000 . It was later released on DVD as part of the season four box set on August 5 , 2003 . 
 = 2009 Astana season = 
 The 2009 season for the Astana cycling team began in January with the Tour Down Under and ended in October with the Giro di Lombardia . As a UCI ProTour team , they were automatically invited to and obliged to attend every UCI ProTour event , and were invited to every event in the inaugural UCI World Calendar as well . 
 With a strong identity as a stage racing team , Astana 's leaders in 2009 were Alberto Contador , Levi Leipheimer , and Lance Armstrong , who returned to competitive cycling in 2009 after a four @-@ year absence . The team 's manager up through the Tour de France was Johan Bruyneel . 
 The team 's biggest success in 2009 was Contador 's overall victory in the Tour de France . Elsewhere , their main successes in 2009 were in small stage races , with Contador winning the Volta ao Algarve and the Vuelta al País Vasco as well as two stages in Paris – Nice , and Leipheimer winning the Tour of California and the Vuelta a Castilla y León . The team also won the team classification at numerous events . The team failed to live up to lofty expectations in the Giro d 'Italia ; Leipheimer was widely considered a favorite for victory , as was Armstrong before a collarbone injury sustained weeks before , but Leipheimer finished sixth overall and the team did not win any stage . 
 Away from competition , the team 's season was marked by financial troubles with their sponsors in the Kazakhstani government , which threatened the team 's makeup and very existence for a time . The return of Alexander Vinokourov from retirement and a ban for doping , which ended just as the 2009 Tour de France did , changed the team 's makeup for 2010 . 
 = = 2009 team roster = = 
 Ages as of January 1 , 2009 
 = = One @-@ day races = = 
 = = = Spring classics = = = 
 By their own admission , Astana did not aim for the classics . Astana 's first one @-@ day race of the season was Omloop Het Nieuwsblad . Their best @-@ placed rider was Michael Schär in 35th . Aside from their one podium finish , with Maxim Iglinsky in E3 Prijs Vlaanderen , the seventh place attained by Daniel Navarro in the Gran Premio di Lugano was the team 's best result in a one @-@ day race in the spring season . Through Kuurne – Brussels – Kuurne , Milan – San Remo ( which saw the participation of Armstrong ) , the Tour of Flanders , Gent – Wevelgem , Paris – Roubaix , the Amstel Gold Race , La Flèche Wallonne , and Liège – Bastogne – Liège they did not have a rider finish higher than 16th ( Assan Bazayev in Milan – San Remo ) 
 = = = Fall races = = = 
 Astana raced a light schedule in the fall , with the pinnacle of their season having come at the Tour de France . The team sent squads to the Clásica de San Sebastián , Vattenfall Cyclassics , the GP Ouest @-@ France , the Giro dell 'Emilia , the GP Beghelli , the Giro del Piemonte , and the Giro di Lombardia . Their best results from this crop of races came from Alexander Vinokourov , who finished seventh in Lombardy and fifth in the Giro dell 'Emilia . 
 = = Stage races = = 
 The first event in which the team participated in 2009 was the Tour Down Under . As it was Armstrong 's first event back after four years of retirement , he made lots of headlines and was even specially promoted on the event 's webpage , though neither he nor the team were especially competitive in the event . Armstrong finished 29th overall , with the same time as Jesús Hernández in 28th as the best @-@ placed Astana riders . The team did not finish in the top ten in any stage . In February , the team competed in the Tour of California , where Leipheimer won the individual time trial in Solvang and the Tour itself for the third straight year . The team also won the teams classification . While the Tour of California was ongoing , the team sent another eight @-@ man squad including Contador and Andreas Klöden to the Volta ao Algarve . Contador and Klöden were first and third , respectively , in the time trial in Stage 4 , giving Contador the overall lead which he retained through the conclusion of the race the next day . 
 At Paris – Nice in March , Contador appeared well in line to repeat his victory there from two years prior , winning the opening individual time trial and the mountainous sixth stage . He dramatically faltered in Stage 7 , however , losing the yellow jersey and three minutes to Luis León Sánchez , and ultimately finishing fourth . He was unable to chase down Sánchez because of what was later blamed on dietary problems . The team experienced both success and hardship in the Vuelta a Castilla y León later in the month . Leipheimer won the event overall , with Contador having ridden the event in support for him . The first day , however , Armstrong was involved in a crash and taken to the hospital with was later revealed as a fractured clavicle . The injury was thought to take away from Armstrong 's previously high odds to win the Giro d 'Italia , and there was briefly speculation that he would even pull out of the Giro because of the injury . 
 In April , Contador claimed a convincing victory in the Vuelta al País Vasco , taking the race lead by winning the mountainous Stage 3 and dominating the final time trial . Though they did not race as Astana due to UCI rules , Armstrong , Leipheimer , and Chris Horner took part in the Tour of the Gila at the end of April and early May in what was Armstrong 's first race back from the collarbone injury , with Leipheimer and Armstrong finishing in the top two places . With a squad made up of riders that normally ride in support for others , the team took a stage win ( Klöden ) and second overall ( Janez Brajkovič ) in the Giro del Trentino , also in April . 
 Astana participated in the Volta a Catalunya in May , while the Giro d 'Italia was ongoing . The team did not win any stage , but Haimar Zubeldia took third overall in the event , and the team won the teams classification . In the Critérium du Dauphiné Libéré in June , Contador was thought to be a favorite for victory , but he did not seem to try his hardest to win , not attacking or taking any pulls on the mountainous Stage 5 and seeming to work for Alejandro Valverde on the race 's last two days . The team next took part in the Tour de Suisse , with Klöden in fourth their highest @-@ placed rider . 
 Astana sent squads to the Brixia Tour , the Tour de Pologne , the Tour of Ireland , the Eneco Tour , the Tour of Missouri , and Franco – Belge , but did not obtain a stage win , podium finish , or classification victory in any of them . The squad sent to the Tour de l 'Ain was more successful . Chris Horner obtained the race lead after the individual time trial in stage 3B , which was won by Alexander Vinokourov riding for the Kazakh national team . Though Horner fell to second behind Tour de l 'Ain champion Rein Taaramäe the next day as the race concluded , he did win the points classification . 
 = = Grand Tours = = 
 = = = Giro d 'Italia = = = 
 Astana was one of 22 teams which participated in the Giro d 'Italia . Contador chose to skip the Giro , despite his status as reigning champion , in order to concentrate on the Tour de France . The squad Astana sent to the Giro included Armstrong , in his first Grand Tour since the 2005 Tour de France and first ever Giro , and Leipheimer , who was considered to be a favorite to win the event . Support riders on the squad included Yaroslav Popovych , Chris Horner , and Janez Brajkovič . 
 The team started well , coming in third place in the team time trial in Stage 1 , putting Leipheimer and Armstrong 13 seconds off the race lead . In the first mountain stage three days later , Leipheimer finished with Popovych and Horner with the same time as stage winner Danilo Di Luca , while Armstrong lost 15 seconds . The next day , Armstrong lost nearly three minutes and effectively lost any chance in the General Classification , while Leipheimer remained within ten seconds of stage winner Denis Menchov . Leipheimer was fourth overall after that stage and remained there until Stage 12 , the very long and irregular individual time trial in Cinque Terre , where he was the only rider within a minute of the winning time put up by Menchov and moved to third overall . Horner withdrew from the race after Stage 10 , after sustaining a leg injury that for a time prevented him from even being able to stand . 
 Leipheimer would fall from a podium position days later , though . After stages won by sprinters and breakaways , Stage 16 , with a summit finish at Monte Petrano , was the next real test for riders aiming for the General Classification . Leipheimer was dropped by other leading riders on the climb and wound up losing almost three minutes on the stage , to fall to sixth overall . With their GC hopes all but dashed , Astana decided to try for stage wins on the remaining mountain days in the Giro . Armstrong attacked on Stage 17 and got clear of the leading group , but was unable to bridge to the man in first position on the road , Franco Pellizotti , who went on to win the stage . Ultimately , Astana did not win any stage at the Giro , but they did win the Trofeo Fast Team , beating Team Columbia – High Road by over 24 minutes . 
 = = = Tour de France = = = 
 The team was one of 20 to receive an invitation to the Tour de France . Contador , Leipheimer , and Armstrong were all named to the team . There was much speculation and controversy , which began when Armstrong first signed with the team , over who would be the team 's protected rider in the Tour . Though Armstrong 's express goal in returning from retirement was to win an eighth Tour de France , Contador had won his last three Grand Tours and insisted that he deserved leadership of the team and hinted that he might leave if forced to support Armstrong . Bruyneel assured Contador that he would be the leader before the season began . Contador was also publicly named team leader shortly before the Tour began . 
 The team showed well in the Stage 1 individual time trial , with Contador , Klöden , Leipheimer , and Armstrong all finishing in the top ten , and Contador just 19 seconds off the time put up by stage winner Fabian Cancellara . Two days later , a surprising move made by Team Columbia – HTC resulted in the field being split , as eight members of that team pushed a 28 @-@ man breakaway toward the finish line ahead of the main peloton . Armstrong , Popovych , and Zubeldia were in the first group , as Popovych and Zubeldia had helped to drive the break , while Leipheimer , Contador , and the other members of the team were in the second group 41 seconds back . This resulted in Armstrong rising to third overall and displacing Contador as the team 's best @-@ placed rider . Speculation ensued that this move was meant to firmly install Armstrong as the team 's leader , and Contador was visibly stunned by the stage result when interviewed afterward . 
 Astana won the Stage 4 team time trial the next day , putting Armstrong a mere 22 / <unk> of a second off the race lead and Contador , Klöden , and Leipheimer behind him third through fifth , with Zubeldia also in the top ten at seventh . After a couple of sprinter @-@ friendly stages where the main contenders stuck together out of trouble , the high mountain Stage 7 shook the standings , and Astana , again . Coming to the finish line , a group of overall contenders was in ninth position on the road , as remnants of the morning 's breakaway were scattered ahead of them . Instead of finishing as a cohesive group , Contador attacked from this group and gained 21 seconds , putting him ahead of Armstrong as Astana 's best @-@ placed rider again , though both were within 8 seconds of new race leader Rinaldo <unk> . Armstrong said of Contador 's attack that it " wasn 't really the plan , " but that he was nonetheless unsurprised by it . The team was dealt a major blow in Stage 12 , when Leipheimer , after crashing with Cadel Evans in the final kilometers of the stage , was forced to leave the Tour with a broken wrist . 
 Stage 15 proved to be a crucial one , as the Tour entered Switzerland in a stage with many high mountain climbs . With about three kilometers gone by in an 8 @.@ 8 km final climb to Verbier , Contador attacked and got free of the leading group , that included Klöden and Armstrong , soloing to the line for the stage win and the yellow jersey . Armstrong said after the stage that he had given it everything he had in the climb and Contador was simply the stronger rider ; it was seen as settling any lingering controversy over the squad 's leader and protected rider . Contador all but cemented the Tour title by winning the time trial in Annecy in Stage 18 , just beating out Cancellara to post the day 's best time . Armstrong gained a little over a minute on Fränk Schleck by finishing 16th , and climbed back into a podium position , third , with the result . The two finished the Tour in those positions after holding them on Mont Ventoux , and then riding home safely in the Tour 's largely ceremonial finale in Stage 21 . 
 = = = Vuelta a España = = = 
 The team was one of 22 to receive an invite to the Vuelta a España . After having first been named only as a reserve , the returning Alexander Vinokourov was named to the squad five days before the race began . 
 Astana 's Vuelta was a quiet one . Vinokourov placed in the top ten of the opening individual time trial but he fell out of the top ten of the overall standings the next day due to a crash . Haimar Zubeldia 's 18th @-@ place finish on stage 8 , which was the Vuelta 's first high mountain stage , propelled him into eighth overall until the next day , when he lost time and fell to ninth . In stage 10 , Vinokourov figured in a winning breakaway , but his poor positioning in the four @-@ man sprint finish meant the stage victory went to Cervélo TestTeam 's Simon Gerrans . Before stage 12 , Astana held ninth overall . They continued to hold it after the stage , but the rider in that position changed ; Zubeldia had been in the top ten , but finished further behind stage winner Ryder Hesjedal than Daniel Navarro , so it was Navarro who was the team 's highest @-@ placed rider after the stage . After the next two stages , Navarro also fell from the top ten , and the team did not achieve anything further , with Navarro in 13th their highest @-@ placed rider in the race 's final standings . 
 = = Away from competition = = 
 = = = Financial troubles = = = 
 Shortly before the beginning of the Giro d 'Italia , it was reported that many of the team 's sponsors in Kazakhstan had not paid their full obligations to the team , and that most of the riders had been underpaid to that point in the season as a result . One sponsor , the <unk> state carrier Air Astana , dropped its sponsorship entirely . There was concern that the team itself may fold , as UCI ProTour teams must meet certain financial parameters to stay active , or risk losing their UCI license . 
 In protest to the underpayment by the team 's sponsors , the team decided to change their jersey a week into the Giro . The new jersey was revealed on May 15 , the date of Stage 7 when the Giro returned to Italy from Austria , as having the names of the underpaying sponsors faded out to the point of being unreadable . Of the nine Astana riders in the Giro , eight wore the new jerseys - Andrey Zeits , who is from Kazakhstan , was the only one to stay with the original jersey . The squad at the concurrent Volta a Catalunya did not wear the faded jerseys . 
 It was announced on June 19 that the situation had been resolved , with the Kazakh Cycling Federation agreeing to pay what the sponsors were indebted to the team . The team reverted to its normal jerseys in the Tour de France , with nothing faded out . 
 Shortly after this announcement , rumors circulated that Garmin – Slipstream had been close to signing Contador away from the team , should the Kazakhstani government have failed to pay its obligations and the team defaulted to the ownership of Armstrong or Bruyneel . Other unspecified Spanish Astana riders were also said to be close to jumping to the American team to follow Contador . Garmin team manager Jonathan Vaughters refused to address the rumors , saying that all negotiations are confidential until finalized , but Contador himself commented in September that he had been close to switching before the 2009 Tour began . 
 = = = Return of Alexander Vinokourov and departure of Johan Bruyneel = = = 
 While riding for Astana in the 2007 Tour de France , Alexander Vinokourov tested positive for blood doping , causing the entire team to be removed from the race and Vinokourov to retire after being banned from the sport by his national federation and the UCI . After confirming in October 2008 his intention to return to competitive cycling , Vinokourov stated on the eve of the 2009 Tour de France that he would rejoin Astana , the team he believes was created expressly for him , at the expiration of his two @-@ year ban on July 24 . He indicated that Astana manager Johan Bruyneel will be bound by the team 's sponsors to accept him , or else Bruyneel would be forced from the team . Bruyneel publicly stated in April 2008 that he did not want Vinokourov on a team he ran . 
 The next day , it was further revealed that not only Bruyneel stood to be forced from the team according to Vinokourov , but also Armstrong and other riders from the former Discovery Channel Pro Cycling Team . The team would be built around Vinokourov and Contador , who would be able to choose which riders he wanted his teammates . It would contain almost exclusively Kazakhstani and Spanish riders , in the image of the former Liberty Seguros team , for which Contador previously rode . The matter was even addressed by the President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev . The new team organization would be in place by the Vuelta a España , which Vinokourov would ride . 
 On 21 July , with Contador , Armstrong and Klöden holding three of the top four places in the Tour de France , Bruyneel told Belgian channel VRT that Astana as currently constituted was " finished " and that he would be leaving the team , as Vinokourov and the Kazakh federation had discussed , after the season . 
 = = = = Disposition of riders for 2010 = = = = 
 In the wake of Bruyneel 's announcement about leaving Astana during the Tour , Contador said that he would not consider his future until after the race was over . On 23 July , Lance Armstrong announced the formation of a new U.S. cycling team , Team RadioShack , for 2010 . Whether Bruyneel would take part in this venture was not addressed at the time , but Armstrong then announced Bruyneel 's participation on 25 August . 
 On 31 July , Contador 's agent announced that Contador had turned down an offer to remain with Astana under a new four @-@ year contract because he had felt uncomfortable being caught between the <unk> on one side and Bruyneel on the other , and he was hoping to leave Astana before his contract expired in 2010 . However , on 11 August , Contador 's close friend Sergio Paulinho accepted a two @-@ year contract with Team RadioShack , indicating that Contador might not be able to leave Astana as he and his agent wished . This was confirmed on 15 August , when a spokesperson for the Kazakh sponsors of Astana said that they intended to sponsor the Astana team on the UCI ProTour through 2013 and that they intended to enforce the last year of Contador 's contract with Astana in 2010 . 
 Once Bruyneel 's move to Team RadioShack was confirmed , the squad began filling with transfers from the 2009 Astana team . In addition to Armstrong and Paulinho , Tomas Vaitkus and Gregory Rast joined Team RadioShack as one @-@ day classics specialists , and Jose Luis " <unk> " Rubiera joined for Grand Tour support . On September 1 , Levi Leipheimer 's move to Team RadioShack was confirmed and on October 2 , Andreas Klöden 's move was confirmed . On October 4 , Chris Horner also signed with Team RadioShack for two years . On October 15 , Yaroslav Popovich 's move was also confirmed . It was also reported that Haimar Zubeldia was to remain with Astana , on order from <unk> , though for unclear reasons this changed , as Zubeldia 's transfer to Team RadioShack was confirmed weeks later . With Dimitry Muravyev 's transfer , Astana 's entire 2009 Tour de France squad , Contador aside , had moved to Armstrong 's new team . 
 Two other Astana riders moved with former Discovery Channel rider George Hincapie to team BMC for 2010 : Steve Morabito and Michael Schär . 
 = = Season victories = = 
 = I Never Met the Dead Man = 
 " I Never Met the Dead Man " is the second episode of the first season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on April 11 , 1999 . The episode follows Peter Griffin as he teaches his daughter Meg how to drive . Due to his horrible advice they crash into a satellite dish , knocking out the city 's cable . Peter begins to suffer from television withdrawal but finds new life in outdoor activities , driving his family to exhaustion . Meanwhile , Stewie plots to destroy the world 's supply of broccoli with a weather control device so Lois cannot force him to eat the vegetable . 
 " I Never Met the Dead Man " was written by Chris Sheridan and directed by Michael Dante DiMartino , both firsts in the Family Guy series . Much of the episode 's humor , in standard Family Guy fashion , is structured around cutaway sequences that parody popular culture , including those centered on Wile E. Coyote and The Road Runner , Star Trek , Wizard of Oz , ALF , Gilligan 's Island , Bewitched , and Beverly Hills , 90210 . The title " I Never Met the Dead Man " was derived from 1930s and 1940s radio programs , particularly the radio thriller anthology Suspense , which featured several elements pertaining to death and murder . The episode featured guest performances by Erik Estrada , Butch Hartman , Aaron Lustig and Joey Slotnick , along with several recurring voice actors for the series . This episode was rated TV @-@ 14 . 
 Critical responses to the episode were favorable ; several television critics singled it out as among the " most memorable " episodes in the series and considered it to be an improvement over " Death Has a Shadow " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Annoyed that Peter spends more time watching television than with his own family , Lois suggests he teach Meg how to drive . Peter reluctantly agrees , and unwittingly gives Meg a series of bad driving tips , including instructing her to " rev " her engine twice at stop lights and challenge other drivers to a race , which causes her to ultimately fail her driving test . As Peter drives them home from the DMV he notices that a show he wanted to watch is on television in a nearby house . Distracted by the show , he crashes the car into a main cable television transmitter , knocking out reception for the whole entire town of Quahog . Panicking , Peter makes a promise to Meg so that if she takes the blame for knocking down the cable transmitter , she would get a new convertible when she finally gets her licence . Once they arrive home with the transmitter still attached to the car , Lois becomes furious with Peter for placing the blame on his own daughter . Meg , of course , is blamed , and is about to admit the truth , but then decides to keep quiet , reflecting with an inner voice , a reference to The Wonder Years , at school . This shows an incredible lack of good judgment and morals by Peter . Meanwhile , Stewie , ( seeing the opportunity of the dish attached to car ) , steals the satellite dish in a plan to create a weather control device capable of destroying the world 's supply of broccoli , since Lois had forced him to eat the vegetable earlier that day . 
 Suffering withdrawal syndrome from the lack of cable , Peter straps a television @-@ sized cardboard cutout to himself , making it appear as though his whole world is actually a television program . When Meg can no longer deal with the public scorn , she reveals that her father is really responsible for Quahog 's loss of television , causing the town to turn against him . In an attempt to save Peter from further scorn and verbal attacks , Lois gives a heartfelt speech to the community about how television has kept them all from enjoying one another . Inspired by the speech , Peter drags the family to one outdoor activity after another , which quickly exhausts them . Once the family can no longer keep up with him , Peter decides to go off with William Shatner , who has appeared on the Griffin family doorstep after experiencing a flat tire , to a nearby festival . Meanwhile , Stewie 's weather machine creates a huge rainstorm . The storm 's lightning strike destroys Stewie 's weather machine and blows Stewie off the roof and on the ground . While Meg is practicing driving with Lois , the storm causes her to accidentally hit Shatner and Peter , killing Shatner and hospitalizing Peter . As her father recovers , in a full @-@ body cast , he is forced to watch television , causing him to become addicted once again , much to his family 's relief . 
 During the credits , Stewie tries ( and fails ) to make believe he is eating his broccoli by pouring it onto Brian 's plate . 
 = = Production = = 
 " I Never Met the Dead Man " was the first episode of Family Guy for both writer Chris Sheridan and director Michael Dante DiMartino . For the first months of production , the writers shared one office lent to them by the King of the Hill production crew . As with the remaining first four episodes of the season , the title of the episode was derived from 1930s and 1940s radio programs , particularly the radio thriller anthology " Suspense " , which featured several elements pertaining to death and murder . This convention was later dropped following the fourth episode of the season . In addition to the regular cast , actor Erik Estrada , writer and animator Butch Hartman , actor Aaron Lustig , actor Joey Slotnick and voice actor Frank Welker guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actress Lori Alan also made minor appearances . The episode originally aired on April 11 , 1999 , nearly three months after the series premiere . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Meg asks her mother to help teach her how to drive , Lois suggests Peter take her driving instead . With Peter refusing in order to continue watching an episode of Star Trek , actor William Shatner , as portrayed by series creator Seth MacFarlane , then appears on the screen . 
 Going on to suggest her father is not the best driver , Brian recalls a previous driving incident Peter had with Wile E. Coyote , in which he accidentally ran over the Road Runner in the middle of the desert . When Peter is concerned about the " Ostrich " he just hit Wiley tells him to keep going . 
 In school , when Meg is about to confess that her dad was actually the one who crashed the car , she reflects with an inner voice , a reference to the 1990s hit TV Show The Wonder Years . 
 Continuing to suffer a withdrawal from not being able to watch television , Peter has a Wizard of Oz @-@ inspired nightmare featuring Alf from the 1986 NBC sitcom ALF , Gilligan from the 1964 CBS series Gilligan 's Island , The Robot from " Lost in Space " , and Jeannie from " I Dream of Jeannie , " who promptly transforms into Samantha from the 1964 ABC series Bewitched . 
 After creating a cardboard cutout in the shape of a television , Peter walks around town with the contraption strapped to his waist , perceiving the actions around him as television . Two women talking over lunch suggests that he is watching the television station Lifetime , two elderly people out walking reminds him of CBS , a group of African Americans playing basketball suggests UPN , and James Woods High School reminds him of Beverly Hills , 90210 . 
 After TV service is restored and most of the Griffin family is watching Star Trek , James T. Kirk tells his crew that there is a dangerous mission in that someone will surely be killed . He says the landing party will consist of himself , Mr. Spock , Dr. McCoy , and " Ensign Ricky " ( a redshirt ) , who , upon being called , cynically says " Oh crap ! " , due to the television trope of oft @-@ related instances of redshirt ensigns being killed on the show . At the end of the episode , after Meg accidentally hits and kills Shatner with the Griffin family car , the group of people looking over includes the actor who played " Ensign Ricky " stating " Wow , I did not see that one coming . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews for the episode were generally favorable . A 2008 review of the episode by Ahsan Haque of IGN was positive , calling the storyline involving Stewie " elaborate [ and ] creative . " He gave the episode a perfect score of ten , calling it one of the most " memorable " episodes in the entire series . Haque went on to note that " the tightly woven and hilarious storyline , combined with a constant barrage of cleverly inserted random jokes , and some truly unique imagery help make this episode one of the finest in the series . This is Family Guy at its best , and definitely sets a very high bar for animated comedy . " Robin Pierson of The TV Critic rated the episode a 70 out of 100 , making it the highest @-@ rated episode of Family Guy on the site . Pierson described the episode as " A really fun twenty two minutes of television . There are so many jokes to enjoy and they are more focussed than the pilot , " in particular praising the Fast Animals , Slow Children sequence . 
 In 2008 , Haque later listed Stewie 's plan to freeze broccoli crops as number one on his list of " Stewie 's Top 10 Most Diabolical Evil Plans " and placed Peter 's idea to pretend the world is a television program by attaching a cardboard cutout of a television set around his waist in fifth place on his list of " Peter Griffin 's Top 10 Craziest Ideas " . 
 = Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl = 
 Adoptive Couple v. Baby Girl , 570 U.S. _ _ _ ( 2013 ) , was a decision of the Supreme Court of the United States that held that several sections of the Indian Child Welfare Act ( ICWA ) do not apply to Native American ( Indian ) biological fathers who are not custodians of an Indian child . The court held that the procedures required by the ICWA to end parental rights do not apply when the child has never lived with the father . Additionally , the requirement to make extra efforts to preserve the Indian family also does not apply , nor is the preferred placement of the child in another Indian family required when no other party has formally sought to adopt the child . 
 In 2009 , a couple from South Carolina , Matthew and Melanie Capobianco , sought to adopt a child whose father , Dusten Brown , was an enrolled member of the Cherokee Nation and whose mother , Christina Maldonado , was predominantly Hispanic . Brown contested the adoption on the grounds that he was not properly notified in accordance with the ICWA , and won both in trial court and on appeal to the South Carolina Supreme Court , and in December 2011 , the father was given custody of the child . The case received extensive coverage in the national media , and spurred calls for Congress to review and make amendments to the 1978 law . 
 In October 2012 , the adoptive couple petitioned the Supreme Court of the United States to review the case . In January 2013 , the court granted certiorari and heard the case in April . In June , the Supreme Court issued a 5 – 4 decision , holding that a non @-@ custodial father did not have rights under the ICWA , and sent the case back to the South Carolina courts for further hearings on the issue . In July 2013 , the South Carolina trial court finalized the adoption of the child to the adoptive couple , but this was prohibited in August by the Oklahoma Supreme Court . The stay was lifted in September 2013 , and the child was turned over to her adoptive parents the same month . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Indian Child Welfare Act = = = 
 Prior to the adoption of ICWA in 1978 , Indian children were often forcibly removed from their homes and placed in either Native American boarding schools or in non @-@ Indian foster and adoptive homes . Studies conducted in 1969 and in 1974 indicated that many as 25 to 35 percent of tribal children were being removed from their homes , and consequently from tribal culture . Testimony in the House Committee for Interior and Insular Affairs showed that in some states , the per capita rate of Indian children in foster care was nearly 16 times higher than the rate for non @-@ Indians . In some cases , the Bureau of Indian Affairs ( BIA ) paid the states to remove tribal children and to place them with non @-@ Indian families and religious groups . Congress determined that if Indian children continued to be removed from Indian homes at this rate , tribal survival would be threatened and stated that tribal stability was as important as the best interests of the child . One of the factors in this judgment was that , because of the differences in culture , what was in the best interest of a non @-@ Indian child was not necessarily what was in the best interest of an Indian child , especially due to the influence of extended families and tribal relationships . The Indian Child Welfare Act ( ICWA ) was enacted in 1978 to protect Indian tribes and their children . 
 The ICWA applies to " Indian children " , defined as " any unmarried person who is under age eighteen and is either ( a ) a member of an Indian tribe or ( b ) is eligible for membership in an Indian tribe and is the biological child of a member of an Indian tribe . " Additionally , in the case of a voluntary adoption of an Indian child , the courts must follow specific guidelines for the Indian birth parents to waive their parental rights or have them terminated . The ICWA provides that to relinquish parental rights , an Indian parent must : 
 do so in writing , 
 do so before a judge , 
 who must certify that the parent understood his or her actions , 
 understands spoken English or has a translator available , and 
 a relinquishment may not be executed prior to ten days after the child 's birth . 
 The Indian parent may also withdraw their consent to an adoption at any time prior to a final order , or within two years of the final order if their consent was obtained through fraud or under duress . If involuntary termination occurs , it must be " supported by evidence beyond a reasonable doubt . " When consent is withdrawn or if the ICWA procedures are not followed , the Indian child is to be immediately returned to the Indian parent . 
 Tribal rights are also covered by the act . Tribal courts have exclusive jurisdiction for cases arising on Indian reservations and concurrent jurisdiction elsewhere . The case may be removed from a state court to a tribal court at the request of the tribe unless one of the Indian child 's parents object . In any case , the tribe has a right to intervene in the proceeding and to act to protect the tribal rights of the child . 
 = = = Case history = = = 
 Dusten Brown is a member of the Cherokee Nation . Brown served in the United States Army at Fort Sill , Oklahoma . Christina Maldonado was a non @-@ Indian single mother of two . Brown and Maldonado became engaged to be married in December 2008 , and Maldonado informed Brown that she was pregnant in January 2009 . On learning that Maldonado was pregnant , Brown began to press her to go ahead and marry him , and refused to provide any financial support until after the two had married . In May 2009 , Maldonado broke off the engagement by text message and cut all communications with Brown . In June , Maldonado sent Brown a text message asking if he would rather pay child support or relinquish his parental rights . Brown responded via text message that he relinquished his rights . No child support order was in place at this time . Furthermore , while laws vary from state to state , it is generally impossible for any parent , male or female , to surrender their parental rights without a court hearing that determines the best interest of the child . A father cannot terminate his parental rights by contract , much less by more informal means ( such as by text message ) . 
 A few months prior to the baby 's birth , Maldonado began to work with an adoption attorney to place the child with Matthew Capobianco and Melanie Duncan Capobianco of James Island , South Carolina . Although Oklahoma law requires that an Indian tribe be informed if an Indian child is to be adopted , Maldonado 's attorney misspelled Brown 's name and provided an incorrect date of birth . As a result , the tribe was not notified about the proposed adoption . After receiving permission from Oklahoma authorities , based in part on the identification of the child as Hispanic rather than Native American , the Capobiancos took the child to South Carolina . Four months after the birth of the child and just days before deployment to Iraq , Brown was served with notice of the proposed adoption . Brown signed the document , believing that he was relinquishing rights to Maldonado . Brown , once he realized what he had signed , immediately tried to retrieve the document , and after that failed , contacted the Judge Advocate General at Fort Sill for assistance . Seven days after being notified of the proposed adoption by the Capobiancos , Brown obtained a stay of the adoption proceedings under the <unk> Civil Relief Act and he deployed with his Army unit to Iraq . 
 = = = Trial court = = = 
 The adoption case was heard in Charleston County Family Court in September 2011 . Brown contested the adoption , and the Cherokee Nation intervened as a party in its own right in the case . The court denied the Capobiancos ' petition to adopt the child , and ordered that the child be returned to Brown as the biological father . Under South Carolina law , a father 's parental rights were terminated if he did not provide pre @-@ birth support and become involved with the child shortly after birth , but the court noted that the ICWA preempts state law . On November 25 , 2011 , the court issued a ruling , holding that : 
 the ICWA applied and was not unconstitutional , 
 the " Existing Indian Family " exception was inapplicable in this case , 
 Brown did not consent to the termination of his parental rights or the adoption of his child , and 
 the Capobiancos had failed to show by clear and convincing evidence that Brown 's parental rights should be terminated . 
 On December 31 , 2011 the Capobiancos turned over the child to Brown in accordance with the trial court order . The Capobiancos then appealed to the Supreme Court of South Carolina . 
 = = = State Supreme Court = = = 
 Chief Justice Jean H. Toal delivered the opinion of the court on July 26 , 2012 . The five members of the court split 3 @-@ 2 , with Justices Costa M. <unk> and Donald W. Beatty joining the majority opinion , while Justice John W. Kittredge , joined by Justice Kaye G. Hearn , dissented . The opinion decided three issues : First , whether the Capobiancos had improperly removed the child from Oklahoma ; second , whether state law or the ICWA is determinative of Brown 's status as a parent ; and third , whether the Capobiancos met their burden of proof to terminate the parental rights of Brown . 
 Toal noted that the Capobiancos were correct that the removal of the child from Oklahoma did not create an unsafe environment for the child , but they were incorrect on the legal issue . Had Oklahoma been properly notified that this was an Indian child , the Cherokee Nation would have been alerted , and the child 's interests as a member of the tribe would have been protected . She noted that at this point , the case was properly before the court , and proceeded to address the second issue . 
 The Capobiancos argued that it takes more than mere biology to invoke the provisions of the ICWA , and under South Carolina law , a father must reside with the mother for the six @-@ month period preceding the birth of the child and to contribute to pregnancy @-@ related expenses in order to have paternity rights . However , the Court determined that the ICWA does not defer to state law , and the trial court properly determined that the ICWA grants Indian fathers greater rights than state law . 
 Toal then turned to the last issue , the trial court 's refusal to terminate Brown 's parental rights . The Capobiancos could not show that Brown had agreed to consent to the adoption . The court noted that the ICWA set out clear procedural guidelines and the Capobiancos did not comply with those requirements . The Capobiancos also failed to show by clear and convincing evidence that Brown 's parental rights should be terminated . Under the ICWA , prior to terminating an Indian parent 's rights to the Indian child , the party seeking to terminate parental rights " shall satisfy the court that active efforts have been made to provide remedial services and rehabilitative programs designed to prevent the breakup of the Indian family and that these efforts have proved unsuccessful . " The court noted that the Capobiancos made no efforts to comply with this requirement of federal law , but had actively sought to prevent the father from obtaining custody since the child was four months old . 
 The court then addressed the best interests of the child . Toal said , quoting Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians v. Holyfield , " Where an Indian child 's best interests are at stake , our inquiry into that child 's best interests must also account for his or her status as an Indian , and therefore , we must also inquire into whether the placement is in the best interests of the Indian child , " that this was " based on the fundamental assumption that it is in the Indian child 's best interest that its relationship to the tribe be protected . " Toal stated that the best interest of the child was to be with her father , which also preserved her tribal affiliation . 
 Finally , Toal addressed the placement requirements of the ICWA , which requires that placement preference be given , in this order , to : 1 ) another member of the child 's family , 2 ) another member of the child 's tribe , and 3 ) another Indian family . The court stated that neither Maldonado nor the Capobiancos had intended to comply with the statute , and that the Capobiancos could not thereby claim that the breaking of the bond formed by the child with the Capobiancos are grounds to ignore the statute . 
 The court affirmed the decision of the Charleston County Family Court in returning the Indian child to her father , and reiterated that the ICWA preempts state law in the termination of parental rights for Indian parents . 
 = = = = Dissent = = = = 
 Justice John W. Kittredge , joined by Justice Kaye G. Hearn , dissented . Kittredge argued that the state standards for best interest of the child should trump those of the ICWA , and concluded that the trial court judge erred in her findings of fact . He noted that Brown had an income of approximately $ 23 @,@ 000 in 2010 , had paid nothing to assist with pre @-@ birth expenses , and had indicated that he did not intend to do so . In addition , Kittredge stated that the record reflected that Maldonado informed both the adoption agency and the adoption attorney of the child 's Cherokee heritage , but the notification to the tribe did not have the correct identifying information for the father . At the child 's birth , the Capobiancos were present , and Matt Capobianco cut the umbilical cord . 
 Kittredge then evaluated the ICWA , noting that South Carolina law did not allow a father in Brown 's position to contest an adoption . Brown acknowledged paternity , and a DNA test conclusively proved that he was the biological father . Because Brown met the definition of an Indian parent , the ICWA does apply to the case . Even if Brown had not acknowledged paternity , the child was still an Indian and the federal law would apply . However , Kittredge then stated that even though the ICWA applied , Congress did not intend the ICWA to replace state law with regard to a child 's best interests . 
 Kittredge concluded that Brown had " abandoned " his child and should therefore not be allowed to contest the adoption . He noted that the Capobiancos provided the child with a loving and stable home . Finally , he would have ruled that termination of Brown 's parental rights was in the best interest of the child , and would have reversed the decision of the trial court . 
 = = Supreme Court = = 
 = = = Arguments = = = 
 After the South Carolina Supreme Court declined to rehear the case , the Capobiancos filed a petition with the United States Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari . Seven entities filed amici curiae briefs with the Supreme Court in support of hearing the case . This included amici briefs by two former U.S. Solicitors General : Paul Clement on behalf of the guardian ad litem , and Greg Garre on behalf of the birth mother . The American Academy of Adoption Attorneys , the National Council for Adoption , the California State Association of Counties and the Center for Adoption Policy were also among those that submitted briefs . 
 On January 4 , 2013 , the Court granted certiorari and agreed to hear the case . This was only the second time that a case involving the ICWA had been granted review by the U.S. Supreme Court , Holyfield being the first . On April 1 , 2013 , the court decided to allow some of the amici to participate in oral argument and divided the time allowed for oral argument as follows : 20 minutes for petitioners , 10 minutes for respondent Guardian ad <unk> , 20 minutes for respondent Birth Father , and 10 minutes for the Solicitor General . Brown was represented by Charles <unk> , who was a director at the Yale Law School Supreme Court Clinic and Supreme Court litigator with the Washington , D.C. , office of the international law firm Mayer Brown . The Cherokee Nation was represented by Carter Phillips of Sidley Austin , LLP . The Capobiancos were represented by Lisa Blatt and Mark Fiddler . Blatt headed the Appellate and Supreme Court practice with international law firm Arnold & Porter . Fiddler was a registered Native American attorney and the founder of the Indian Child Welfare Law Center 
 The issues presented to the court were " ( 1 ) Whether a non @-@ custodial parent can invoke the Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978 ( ICWA ) , 25 U.S.C. § § 1901 – 63 , to block an adoption voluntarily and lawfully initiated by a non @-@ Indian parent under state law ; and ( 2 ) whether ICWA defines " parent " in 25 U.S.C. § 1903 ( 9 ) to include an unwed biological father who has not complied with state law rules to attain legal status as a parent . " 
 Three parties filed merit briefs : the Capobiancos as petitioners , and both Brown and the Cherokee Nation as respondents . 32 different amici curiae briefs were filed arguing the merits of the case . Nine were in favor of reversal and the remainder , including the United States Department of Justice , supported the respondents generally and / or affirmation . 
 = = = Opinion of the Court = = = 
 Justice Samuel Alito delivered the opinion of the Court . Alito noted that three provisions of the ICWA were relevant to the case , § 1912 ( f ) , § 1912 ( d ) , and § 1915 ( a ) . He also noted it is undisputed under South Carolina law that Brown would not be able to object to the adoption . Alito stated that the heightened standard required under § 1912 ( f ) does not apply when the parent in question never had custody of the child , focusing on the phrase " continued custody " in the statute . Alito continued that § 1912 ( d ) does not require remedial efforts be made when the parent did not have custody . Since Brown never had either physical or legal custody , no remedial efforts were required . Finally , § 1915 ( a ) does not prevent a non @-@ Indian couple from adopting when no preferred individuals or entities have formally sought to adopt the child . 
 = = = Concurring opinions = = = 
 = = = = Justice Thomas = = = = 
 Justice Clarence Thomas issued a concurring opinion . Thomas stated that the canon of constitutional avoidance required the outcome reached by the majority . Thomas contended that there was no constitutional authority for Congress to enact the ICWA . Since the application of the ICWA to the adoption would be unconstitutional , and the result of the majority avoids this issue , Thomas concurred with the majority . 
 = = = = Justice Breyer = = = = 
 Justice Stephen Breyer also issued a very short concurring opinion . Breyer stated that since the ICWA does not address how to treat absentee fathers , the Court 's decision may be too broad . He also noted that the preferential placement order required under § 1915 ( a ) could be changed by the tribe under § 1915 ( c ) and a tribe could , by resolution , grant the absentee father a place in preferential placement . 
 = = = Dissenting opinions = = = 
 = = = = Justice Scalia = = = = 
 Justice Antonin Scalia issued a very short dissenting opinion . He stated that , in his opinion , the phrase " continued custody " could refer to " custody in the future " – in other words , even if the biological father had no custody of the child in the past , he could have it in the future , and therefore USC § 1912 ( f ) would still apply . Scalia also noted that biological parents also had legal rights and that there was no reason in law or policy to dilute those rights . 
 = = = = Justice Sotomayor = = = = 
 Justice Sonia Sotomayor dissented from the majority opinion . Sotomayor stated that " continued custody " in § 1912 ( f ) is " most sensibly read to refer generally to the continuation of the parent @-@ child relationship that an ICWA " parent " has with his or her child . " She also stated that even a non @-@ custodial father @-@ child relationship was a " family " for the purposes of § 1912 ( d ) and therefore efforts needed to be made to prevent its breakup . She stated that the majority turned the law " upside down " to reach their result . She indicated that the narrow interpretation of the statute by the majority destroyed the unified federal standard established by Congress in favor of a piecemeal system of state control . Finally , Sotomayor stated that the majority ignored the primary purpose of the ICWA in its interpretation of § 1915 ( a ) , and noted that there was nothing to prevent the grandparents from filing a petition to adopt the child . She noted that nothing in the opinion mandated the return of the child to the Capobiancos . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 = = = Media coverage = = = 
 = = = = Prior to Supreme Court decision = = = = 
 Coverage in the mainstream media was extensive . Charleston 's Post and Courier ran a series of articles on the case , and the news was picked up by other media outlets . These included local television stations , distant television stations , Cable News Network ( CNN ) , Fox News Channel , national magazines , U.S. News , and the New York Times . Additionally , Dr. Phil McGraw featured the Capobiancos on his television show in an episode that aired on October 18 , 2012 . The show immediately sparked controversy , with some Indian newspapers and internet news sources calling for a boycott of his show due to what they alleged was a one @-@ sided attack on Native Americans . It has also been alleged that the mainstream media has disseminated incorrect and false information that portrayed the Capobiancos in a good light and Brown in a bad light . 
 Terry Cross of the National Indian Child Welfare Association ( <unk> ) commented that despite all the negative press , the ICWA was needed to protect Indian children from having their tribal rights taken from them . He noted that a failure to comply with the ICWA was what caused the controversy in the case . The author of the ICWA , Senator Jim <unk> initially stated that this is " something totally different than what we intended at the time " but two weeks later said that the main intent of the law was to ensure that tribes had an opportunity to sign off on the adoption of tribal children . 
 = = = = Post @-@ opinion = = = = 
 After the Supreme Court decision , most media outlets stated that the Capobiancos won the case , although some correctly noted that they did not gain custody , nor receive an order of adoption . Some noted that even with the decision , the return of the child to the Capobiancos was not " foreordained " and that the case had to return to South Carolina state courts for additional hearings . 
 = = = = Social media = = = = 
 The case received a great deal of coverage in social media . A friend of Melanie Duncan Capobianco , Jessica Munday , is a publicist who had previously done contracted work for Melanie Duncan 's employer MST Services [ <unk> Therapy ] in South Carolina . Munday started a " Save Veronica " campaign aimed at gathering grassroots support for the couple 's efforts to overturn both the Charleston Family Court and the South Carolina Supreme Court decisions . Munday , who runs the marketing firm Trio Solutions Inc . [ <unk> ] in Mount Pleasant , South Carolina , is responsible for making the case well known according to at least one source . Responses from the Native American community pointed out the irony in the campaign , with an editorial cartoon depicting " Veronica " puzzling over a campaign to save her ( an Indian child ) from other Indians . In addition , a movement supporting Dusten Brown and the Cherokee , " Stand Our Ground , " said that the Baby Veronica case has become a strong example of systemic problems in the adoption industry and has pushed for adoption reform . Stand Our Ground started on Facebook then swelled in protests and rallies across several states . 
 = = = Legal developments = = = 
 Maldonado filed suit in the South Carolina U.S. District Court on July 24 , 2013 , asking that the ICWA be declared unconstitutional . On July 31 , 2013 , the Capobiancos legally adopted the child . Concurrently with the South Carolina court finalizing the adoption , the Native American Rights Fund filed a civil rights lawsuit in U.S. District Court on behalf of the child , alleging that her rights had been violated by the South Carolina court . In addition , a South Carolina court order cannot be enforced in Oklahoma without the agreement of an Oklahoma court , and Brown stated that he would fight the order in Oklahoma , with the aid of the Cherokee Nation . Prior to the South Carolina adoption being finalized , the Cherokee Nation District Court granted temporary guardianship to Brown 's wife and parents while Brown was in military training out of state . At the same time , a judge in South Carolina ordered Brown to immediately turn over the child to the Capobiancos , which representatives of the Cherokee Nation said was impossible while Brown was performing his military duties . 
 On August 30 , 2013 , the Oklahoma Supreme Court stayed an order of a district court that the child be immediately be transferred from the custody of Brown to the Capobiancos . The Capobiancos had court @-@ ordered visits with the girl in Oklahoma , while the Brown family celebrated the girl 's fourth birthday at a party on September 15 . A court @-@ ordered mediation hearing took place between the Browns and the Capobiancos between September 16 and September 20 , but failed to produce a resolution . The Oklahoma Supreme Court lifted its stay of the district court order on September 23 , 2013 , clearing the way for custody of the child to be returned to the Capobiancos . The girl was turned over to her adoptive parents on the evening of September 23 , 2013 . On September 25 , 2013 , the Charleston County Family Court began contempt proceedings against Brown and the Cherokee Nation for withholding Veronica in the face of the South Carolina adoption decree , which was finalized in July . Both parties may face financial sanctions that could include defraying living and legal expenses for the Capobiancos during the period that Brown and the Cherokee Nation were allegedly in contempt of court . In October 2013 , Brown announced that he was dropping his appeals to give his daughter a chance at a normal life . 
 In November 2013 , Matt and Melanie Capobianco filed a lawsuit in Nowata County , Oklahoma , demanding more than $ 1 million in court costs , accrued during their custody battle . The lawsuit is against Veronica 's biological father , Dusten Brown , and the Cherokee Nation . The Cherokee Nation issued a forceful response , saying " it is not responsible for paying the fees and costs for the Capobiancos because of its Eleventh Amendment sovereign immunity from suits without its express consent . " The Cherokees also " made clear the tribe 's displeasure with the Capobianco 's very public media appearances , interviews and various fundraising schemes during the same time in which all the parties were under statutory gag order in South Carolina " . 
 = <unk> = 
 An epikleros ( <unk> ; plural epikleroi ) was an heiress in ancient Athens and other ancient Greek city states , specifically a daughter of a man who had no male heirs . In Sparta , they were called <unk> ( <unk> ) , as they were in Gortyn . Athenian women were not allowed to hold property in their own name ; in order to keep her father 's property in the family , an epikleros was required to marry her father 's nearest male relative . Even if a woman was already married , evidence suggests that she was required to divorce her spouse to marry that relative . Spartan women were allowed to hold property in their own right , and so Spartan heiresses were subject to less restrictive rules . Evidence from other city @-@ states is more fragmentary , mainly coming from the city @-@ states of Gortyn and Rhegium . 
 Plato wrote about epikleroi in his Laws , offering idealized laws to govern their marriages . In mythology and history , a number of Greek women appear to have been epikleroi , including Agariste of Sicyon and Agiatis , the widow of the Spartan king Agis IV . The status of epikleroi has often been used to explain the numbers of sons @-@ in @-@ law who inherited from their fathers @-@ in @-@ law in Greek mythology . The Third Sacred War originated in a dispute over epikleroi . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The term epikleros ( a feminine adjective acting as noun ; from the proverb <unk> , <unk> , " on , upon " , and the noun <unk> , <unk> , " lot , estate " ) was used in ancient Greece to describe the daughter of a man who had died leaving no male heir . It translates to " attached to the family property " , or " upon , with the estate " . In most ancient Greek city states , women could not own property , and so a system was devised to keep ownership within the male @-@ defined family line . <unk> ' were required to marry the nearest relative on their father 's side of the family , a system of inheritance known as the epiklerate . Although epikleros is often mistranslated as " heiress " , strictly speaking the terms are not equivalent , as the woman never owned the property and so was unable to dispose of it . Raphael Sealey argues that another translation could be " female orphan " . The term was used interchangeably , both of the woman herself , and of the property that was the inherited estate . The entire system of the epiklerate was unique to Ancient Greece , and mainly an Athenian institution . 
 = = Athens = = 
 Athens is the city @-@ state that is best documented , both in terms of epikleroi and in all aspects of legal history . Athenian law on epikleroi was attributed to Solon ; women with no brothers had to marry their nearest male relative on their paternal side of the family , starting with their father 's brother and moving from there to the next nearest male relative on the paternal side . The historian John Gould notes that the order of relatives that were required to marry the epikleros coincided with the relatives required to avenge a murder . This set of relatives was known as the anchisteia ( <unk> ) in Athens . The anchisteia was also the group of relatives who would inherit property in the absence of legal heirs . If there was more than one possible spouse in a set of relatives , the right to marry the epikleros went to the eldest one . The property that was inherited could also be in debt , which would not affect the epikleros ' status . 
 = = = Definition of the term in Athens = = = 
 Although epikleros was most often used in the case of a daughter who had no living brothers when her father died , the term was also used for other cases . The Suda , a 10th @-@ century CE lexicon and encyclopedia , gives other definitions , including an heiress who was married at the time of her father 's death and an unmarried daughter without brothers still living with her father . The Suda also stated that the term could be used of a daughter who had living sisters . Although the Suda indicates that in normal usage , the mother of the heiress was also dead , this is incorrect : whether or not the mother was alive had no bearing on the status of the epikleros . Occasionally the term is also used as a feminine form of the Greek term <unk> , or " orphan " . Although a scholiast of Aeschines , or a later writer amending the text , stated that the term could also be used of a daughter who was given to a man in marriage on her father 's deathbed , there is no extant use of the term in that sense in literature , and the scholiast has probably misunderstood a scenario from the comic playwright Aristophanes . 
 The term in Athens seems to have always been somewhat loosely used in legal proceedings . Apollodorus , an Athenian politician and litigant from the 4th century BCE , in one of his speeches attempted to use an Athenian law about betrothal to make his mother an epikleros . He claimed that the law defined an epikleros as a female without father , a brother who shared a father with her , or a paternal grandfather . His opponent , however , seems to have disputed this interpretation of the law . A speech by Isaeus , a 4th @-@ century BCE speechwriter , rests on the claim that the speaker 's mother only became an epikleros after her young brother died following their father 's death . Whether the legal authorities recognized the speaker 's claim as valid is unknown . It appears , at least according to some plays , that a woman with a brother who died after their father was considered the epikleros of her brother , not her father . 
 = = = Development of the practice = = = 
 It is unclear if there were laws dealing with epikleroi prior to Solon 's legislative activity around 594 BCE . According to the 1st century CE writer Plutarch , Solon authored legislation covering the epikleros . Solon 's laws attempted to prevent the combination of estates by the marriage of heiresses . Modern historians have seen this as part of an effort by Solon to maintain a stable number of households . According to Plutarch , Solon also legislated that the husband of an epikleros must have sexual intercourse with her at least three times a month in order to provide her with children to inherit her father 's property , but by the time of Pericles ( d . 429 BCE ) this law is definitely attested . It is unclear whether or not the nearest relative had the power to dissolve an epikleros ' previous marriage in order to marry her himself in all cases . The historian Sarah Pomeroy states that most scholars lean towards the opinion that the nearest relative could only dissolve the previous marriage if the heiress had not yet given birth to a son , but Pomeroy also states that this opinion has not yet been definitely proven . Roger Just disagrees and has argued that even if the epikleros had a son she could still be forced to marry her nearest relative . Athenian law also required that if the next of kin did not marry the heiress , he had to provide her with a dowry . It may have been Solon who legislated that if the new spouse was unable to fulfill his thrice monthly duties to his wife , she was entitled to have sex with his next of kin so that she could produce an heir to her father 's property . Alternatively , she might have been required to divorce and marry the next nearest relative . 
 = = = Legal procedures = = = 
 When a man died leaving an epikleros , the heiress was felt to be <unk> , or as it literally translates , " <unk> " . This made her available for the specialized procedure for the betrothal of an epikleros , a type of court judgement called <unk> . The proceedings took place in the archon 's court , for citizen epikleroi . For the epikleroi of resident aliens in Athens , the metics , the polemarch was in charge of their affairs . It was also the case that if a man made a will , but did not give any of his daughters their legal rights as epikleroi in the will , then that will was held to be invalid . A young Athenian male , prior to coming of age and serving his time as an ephebe , or military trainee , was allowed to claim epikleroi , the only legal right an ephebe was permitted in Aristotle 's day , besides that of taking office as a priest in an hereditary priesthood . It is also unclear if a man who was eligible to marry an epikleros but was already married could keep his previous wife while also claiming the epikleros . While all evidence points to the ancient Athenians being monogamous , there are two speeches by Demosthenes implying that men did indeed have both a wife acquired through the normal betrothal procedure and another who was adjudicated to them through the <unk> ( <unk> ) procedure . The archon was also responsible for overseeing the treatment of epikleroi , along with widows , orphans , widows who claimed to be pregnant and households that were empty . 
 When sons of an epikleros came of age , they gained the ownership of the inheritance . In Athens , this age was given in an extant law , and was two years past the age of puberty of the son . In Solon 's laws , it appears that the eldest son of the epikleros was considered the heir of his maternal grandfather , with any further sons being considered part of their father 's household . The son 's inheritance of his maternal grandfather 's property happened whether or not his father and mother were alive , unlike most other inheritances . And the son of an epikleros did not inherit anything from his father , and was named after his grandfather . The heir could further consolidate his position by being posthumously adopted by his maternal grandfather , but this was not required . By the 4th century BCE , legal practices had changed , and the son could also inherit from his father , as well as from his maternal grandfather . And if there was more than one son , they divided the estate passed by the epikleros between themselves . After the heir secured possession of his inheritance , the law specified that he was to support his mother . It is likely that the debts of the grandfather were also inherited along with any property . 
 Although the law did not rule on who exactly owned the property before the son took possession , it appears from other sources that it was not actually owned by the husband of the epikleros , in contrast to the usual procedure in Athens where the husband owned any property of the wife and could do with it as he willed . A number of speeches imply that the property was considered to be owned by the epikleros herself , although she had little ability to dispose of it . The husband probably had day to day control of the property and administered it , but was responsible for the management to the epikleros ' heirs when they came of age . The position of the husband of an epikleros was closest to that of an <unk> , or the guardian of an orphan 's property , who was likewise responsible to the orphan for his care of the property when the orphan came of age . Another parallel with the orphan was that an epikleros ' property was exempt from liturgies ( <unk> ) , or the practice of requiring citizens to perform public tasks without compensation , as was the orphan 's . 
 It may have been possible for the husband of an epikleros to allow the posthumous adoption of the son of an epikleros as the son of the epikleros ' father . This would prevent the inheritance of the newly adopted son of any property from his natural father , but it had the advantage of preserving the adoptee 's oikos , commonly translated as " household " but incorporating ideas of kinship and property also . Although the preservation of the paternal oikos is usually felt to be the reason behind the whole practice of the epiklerate , the historian David Schaps argues that in fact , this was not really the point of the practice . Instead , he argues , that it was the practice of adoption that allowed the preservation of an oikos . Schaps feels that the reason the epiklerate evolved was to ensure that orphaned daughters were married . Other historians , including Sarah Pomeroy , feel that the children of an epikleros were considered to transmit the paternal grandfather 's oikos . The historian Cynthia Patterson agrees , arguing that adoption may have seemed unnecessary , especially if the epikleros and her husband gave their son the name of the maternal grandfather . She argues that too much attention has been paid to the patrilineal aspects of the oikos , and that there was probably less emphasis on this in actual Athenian practice and more on keeping a household together as a productive unit . 
 The historian Roger Just states the main principle of the epiklerate was that no man could become the guardian of the property without also becoming the husband of the epikleros . Just uses this principle to claim that any man adopted by the father of an epikleros was required to marry the epikleros . Just states that the forcible divorce and remarriage of an epikleros was based on this principle , arguing that if the father of the epikleros had not adopted the first husband , the husband was not really the heir . Just sees the development of the epiklerate as flowing from Solon 's desire to keep the number of Athenian households constant . According to Just , before Solon 's legislation , the epikleros was just treated as part of the property , but that Solon 's reforms transformed the epikleros into a transmitter of the property and her son the automatic heir to her father 's estate . 
 Taking as a wife an epikleros who had little estate was considered a praiseworthy action , and was generally stressed in public speeches . Such an heiress was called an epikleros <unk> . If the nearest male relative did not wish to marry an epikleros who belonged to the lowest income class in Athens , he was required to find her a husband and provide her with a dowry on a graduated scale according to his own income class . This dowry was in addition to her own property and the requirement was designed to ensure that even poor heiresses found husbands . The law also did not stipulate what was to happen if the epikleros was still an infant or too young for consummation of the marriage when she was claimed . 
 = = = Sequence of the anchisteia = = = 
 The first set of relatives that had claim to an epikleros were the paternal uncles and any heirs of the uncles . Next in line were any sons of the sisters of the father and any of their heirs . Third in line were the grandsons of the father 's paternal uncles , and following them the grandsons of the paternal aunts of the father . After these paternal relatives were exhausted , then the half @-@ brothers of the father by the same mother were in line , then sons of the maternal half @-@ sisters of the father . Seventh in line were the grandsons of maternal uncles of the father and then grandsons of maternal aunts of the father . It appears that if there were two or more relatives that were related in the same degree , the eldest of the similarly @-@ related relatives had priority in claiming the epikleros . 
 = = = Chances of becoming an epikleros = = = 
 Modern estimates of the odds of an Athenian woman becoming an epikleros say that roughly one out of seven fathers died without biological sons . However , Athenian law allowed for a man to adopt another male as a son in his will , so not all daughters without brothers would have become epikleroi . Most modern historians estimate that 20 % of families would have had only daughters , and another 20 % would have been childless . The modern historian Cynthia Patterson said of the epikleros that although " she was distinctive , she was not rare " . 
 = = = Already married epikleroi = = = 
 Whether an epikleros who was married at the time of her father 's death was required to divorce her current spouse and marry the anchisteia is unclear . Most modern historians have come to the conclusion that this was only required if the epikleros had not yet had a son that could inherit the grandfather 's estate . The clearest evidence is from the Roman playwright Terence , in his play <unk> , which includes a plot element involving a claim that a girl is actually an epikleros . Although the play was written in the 2nd century BCE , Terence adapted most of his plays from earlier Athenian comedies , which makes it slightly more reliable as a source . And common sense argues that if a son had already been born to an epikleros , there was no need to parcel out the epikleros to a relative in order to provide a male heir to the grandfather 's estate . Although the anchisteia had the right to marry the epikleros , he was not required to do so , and could refuse the match or find another spouse for the heiress . It was also possible for the husband of an epikleros , who was not her anchisteia , to buy off the anchisteia in order to remain married to his wife . Such cases were alleged by the speaker of Isaeus ' speech Isaeus 10 as well as a character in Menander 's play Aspis . 
 = = Other city @-@ states = = 
 Evidence for other ancient city states is more scattered and fragmentary . 
 = = = Sparta = = = 
 In ancient Sparta , women had extensive rights , including the right to inherit property and to manage their own and their spouse 's property . The comparable term to epikleros in Sparta was <unk> , occasionally rendered as <unk> . In Sparta the law of epikleros only applied to unmarried girls , and the Spartan kings were responsible for finding spouses for epikleroi who had not been betrothed before their father 's death . Herodotus , in his list of Spartan royal prerogatives , said : " The kings are the sole judges of these cases only : concerning an unmarried heiress , to whom it pertains to have [ her ] , if her father has not <unk> her " , but the exact meaning of this statement is debated . Some historians have interpreted this to mean that the kings had the right to give the heiress to anyone they chose , but others have suggested that the kings merely had the right to bestow the heiress on the nearest male relative , or to arbitrate between competing claims . Another suggestion is that the king 's choice was restricted to citizens who had no land . The name given to these heiresses in Sparta was patroiouchoi , which literally translates as " holders of the patrimony . " They inherited the land themselves , and retained the right to dispose of their inherited property . There were no restrictions on who they might marry . 
 By the 4th century BCE Aristotle records that there were no restrictions on whom an heiress might marry . If she was not married during her father 's lifetime or by directions in her father 's will , her nearest next @-@ of @-@ kin was allowed to marry her wherever he chose . 
 = = = Gortyn = = = 
 In Gortyn , epikleroi were also called <unk> , and they were more generously treated than in Athens . The term <unk> can be literally translated as " having the father 's property " , and was a description of the condition of the heiress . She was considered a patroiouchoi if she had no father or brother by her father living . The relative who had the right to marry her was called a epiballon , and the list of who were eligible for that status was also limited to just her paternal uncles and the sons of those uncles . If there were no candidates fitting those conditions , the patroiouchoi was free to marry as she chose . If she wished , a <unk> could free herself from the obligation to marry her nearest relative by paying him part of her inheritance . If her nearest relative did not wish to marry her , she was free to find a spouse in her tribe , or if none was willing , then she could marry whomever she wished . Gortyn may owe the liberality of its heiress laws to the fact that it was one of the few city @-@ states known to have allowed daughters to inherit even if they had brothers ; daughters in Gortyn received half the share of a son . To prevent the abuse of the system , there was a time limit on the right of the closest epiballon to marry her , and if the limit expired , the right passed to the next nearest epiballon until the patroiouchoi was either married or ran out of possible <unk> . There was a limit , however , that a man could only marry one heiress . Unlike in Athens , the heiress owned her inheritance and her son did not inherit until she died . Her son was also eligible to inherit from his father . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 Rhegium owed its laws on epikleroi to <unk> of Rhegium , a law @-@ giver whose views on this subject were especially esteemed , according to Aristotle . In the city @-@ state of <unk> ' laws , an epikleros had to be given a dowry if her nearest kin did not wish to marry her . During the time of Alexander the Great , <unk> law deals with the inheritance of returning exiles , limiting them to inheriting only their paternal estate or an estate of their mother if she had become an epikleros while in exile . The city @-@ states of Naupactus and Thermus allowed women to inherit property , but whether or not the daughters were considered epikleroi is unknown from the surviving fragments of the laws from those cities . 
 = = Plato = = 
 Plato , in his Laws , set forth rules that governed not the ideal state , which he described in The Republic , but what he felt might be obtainable in the real world . Included amongst them were some dealing with inheritance and heiresses . In general outline , they conformed to Athenian practice , with the daughter of a man who died without male heirs becoming an epikleros . Plato gave rules governing who the husband of the epikleros might be , and said that the inherited plot might not be divided or added to another plot . The main departure from Athenian law came if there was no direct heir , and the inheritance go to collateral relations . In that case , Plato assigned the inheritance not to one person , but to a pair , one male and one female , and ordered that they must marry and provide an heir to the estate , much like the epikleros . 
 = = Later history = = 
 In 318 BCE , Cassander appointed Demetrius Phalereus to govern the city @-@ state of Athens . Demetrius issued a set of laws that are known from later literary works . Although knowledge of these laws is fragmentary , it does not appear that Demetrius legislated anything on the subject of epikleroi . This is in striking contrast to Solon 's legislation , which was concerned with the internal affairs of the family and its external manifestations in public life . By the 4th century BCE , the practice of the epiklerate was falling into disuse , and it disappeared during the Hellenistic Period , although it continued to appear in New Comedy and scattered inscriptions from the 3rd century BCE , if dated correctly , refer to occasional epikleroi . One method that developed to avoid the epiklerate was through the adoption of a son by the father of a possible epikleros . 
 = = Noted epikleroi = = 
 = = = In mythology = = = 
 In the tales of heroic Greece , royal succession often passed from father @-@ in @-@ law to son @-@ in @-@ law , and some historians have seen in this an early example of the epikleros pattern . Some examples include Pelops , Bellerophon , Melampus , Peleus , Telamon , and Diomedes . Not all such heroic era royal successions followed the epikleros pattern however , as in the case of Menelaus , who married Helen of Troy and succeeded Helen 's father Tyndareus , even though Tyndareus had living sons , Kastor and <unk> . Another example is Arete of <unk> in the Odyssey , who was an heiress married to her father 's brother <unk> . 
 = = = Historical examples = = = 
 Aristotle related that the revolt of Mytilene against Athens in 428 BCE originated in a dispute over epikleroi . The Sacred War of 356 – 346 BCE , between Thebes and Phocis , was also started by a disagreement over epikleroi . It is likely that Agariste , the daughter of Cleisthenes of Sicyon who married <unk> of Athens , was an epikleros . Likewise , the widow of the Spartan king Agis IV , Agiatis , was forced to marry Cleomenes , the son of the man who had executed Agis , King Leonidas II . Plutarch stated that the reason Leonidas married Agiatis to <unk> was that Agiatis was a <unk> from her father , <unk> . Another Spartan example may have been Gorgo , the only daughter of King Cleomenes I , who was married to Cleomenes ' brother Leonidas I. 
 <unk> , the granddaughter of the Athenian orator <unk> was an epikleros after the deaths of her grandfather , paternal uncles <unk> and <unk> , and father <unk> . She was married and had a son , whom her father adopted and renamed <unk> . After her father 's adoption of her son , <unk> 's husband , son and father all died , leaving her father 's household in danger of extinction . Her second marriage , however , produced a son who continued the household . Demosthenes ' mother <unk> was the epikleros of <unk> . 
 Other possible epikleroi include the daughters of Polyeuctus , who managed to remain married to their spouses even after becoming epikleroi . <unk> ' daughter was an heiress , and her father tried to marry her to her anchisteia , but the prospective husband refused the match and the daughter was married to a non @-@ relative instead . 
 = = = Literary examples = = = 
 In literature , Antigone , the daughter of Oedipus , would be considered an epikleros , and her uncle Creon would have been responsible for her marriage as well as that of her sister Ismene . The marriage of an epikleros also is part of the plot for Menander 's play Aspis . In Euripides ' play Ion , Erechtheus 's daughter <unk> is an epikleros whose status allows her son Ion to become a citizen of Athens . Alexis , <unk> , Diodorus , Diphilus , <unk> , and <unk> all wrote comedies titled <unk> , although none is extant . Three more comedies were titled <unk> , or " the man to whom an estate is adjudged " - these were by Diphilus , Philemon and Apollodorus of Carystus . Two Latin comedies survive which were based on Greek plays dealing with heiresses : the <unk> , which is based on Apollodorus ' <unk> ; and the <unk> , which is based on Menander 's play <unk> . 
 A speech of Andocides indirectly concerns epikleroi , as the orator claimed that the real origin of the dispute between himself and his cousin <unk> was over which of them would claim an heiress that both were related to . Demosthenes ' speech Against <unk> includes a description of <unk> ' claiming of the epikleros <unk> . 
 = Jake Seamer = 
 John Wemyss " Jake " Seamer ( 23 June 1913 – 16 April 2006 ) was an amateur cricketer who played for Oxford University and Somerset either side of the Second World War . A bespectacled cricketer , Seamer was a right @-@ handed batsman who played with a defensive streak to his game which was rarely seen among amateur batsmen of his time . He was described as a leg break googly bowler , but in truth he rarely bowled at all , and claimed just four first @-@ class wickets . 
 Seamer played the best of his cricket while at Oxford University . All four of his first @-@ class centuries were made for the university side , and his average for Oxford was 35 @.@ 30 , significantly higher than his career average of 20 @.@ 35 . He made his highest score against Free Foresters in his second year , during which he accrued 858 runs , more than double he managed in any other season . On completion of his studies at Oxford , Seamer joined the Sudan Political Service , which limited his first @-@ class cricket appearances to periods of leave . He was named as one of three amateurs to captain Somerset in 1948 , leading the team during June and July . That season was his last for Somerset , and he made only one further first @-@ class appearance . He became a district commissioner in the Sudan , and after leaving the service , he taught at Marlborough College and was twice mayor of Marlborough . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jake Seamer was born in Shapwick , Somerset on 23 June 1913 . The son of a vicar , Seamer had two secret career wishes in his youth ; he wanted to be either an actor or , failing that , a county cricketer . He attended Marlborough College in Wiltshire , and played for the school 's cricket team from 1930 to 1932 . In the winter terms , Marlborough also ran rugby union and hockey teams – rugby in the term before Christmas and hockey in the term between Christmas and Easter . Seamer was a member of the rugby team in 1930 and 1931 first as a wing forward , then as a prop forward . He also played hockey for the Marlborough first team . As a cricketer , his performances for his school led to his selection for " Lord 's Schools " in match against " The Rest " at Lord 's Cricket Ground , in which he scored 33 runs in the first innings and 3 runs in the second , remaining not out on both occasions . Following that match he also appeared for a representative Public Schools side against the Army at Lord 's , but his batting was less successful , failing to reach double figures in either innings . 
 During the summer between graduating from Marlborough College and going up to Oxford University , Seamer made his county cricket debut , playing three matches for Somerset County Cricket Club . In his first match for Somerset , played against Derbyshire , he played as a specialist batsman at number eight in the batting order . He came in to bat when Somerset had lost six wickets for the addition of 88 runs , and together with his captain , Reggie Ingle , helped Somerset to recover . The pair put on a partnership of 104 runs , and Seamer scored 70 runs in his debut innings . In both his other matches for the county that season , Seamer batted as part of the top order , and though he reached double figures in each of his innings , he did not achieve another half @-@ century . 
 = = University years = = 
 = = = University cricket = = = 
 Following his graduation from Marlborough College , Seamer attended Brasenose College , Oxford . Seamer played just one first @-@ class match for the university in his first year , appearing against Worcestershire at The Parks . He scored 33 before being run out in his only innings , and also bowled six overs , though without claiming a wicket . He appeared eleven times for Somerset that year , but despite regular scores of 20 or more , he did not score a half @-@ century , and averaged 13 @.@ 06 runs . 
 In his second year at Oxford , Seamer played as part of a strong batting line @-@ up for the university : Fredrick de <unk> passed 1 @,@ 000 runs for the side , while Mandy Mitchell @-@ Innes fell just two runs short of the landmark . Seamer , despite scoring over three hundred runs less than either , finished second in the batting averages for the year with 51 @.@ 76 . He scored three centuries for the university , passing one hundred runs against the Free Foresters , the Minor Counties and the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) . His score of 194 , made against the Free Foresters was the highest first @-@ class total of Seamer 's career , and the three centuries he scored during 1934 were remarkable for the fact that he only scored one other first @-@ class century during his career . Seamer earned his cricketing Blue in 1934 , appearing in the University match against Cambridge University . He was dismissed for a duck in the first innings , but batted with resolve in the second . He remained at the crease with the tail for over two hours , eventually being not out on 24 , to help Oxford force a draw . Seamer found batting more difficult in the County Championship : in thirteen innings for Somerset in 1934 , he passed 50 once , against Kent , and averaged 16 @.@ 81 , significantly lower than his total for Oxford . 
 Seamer scored the last of his four first @-@ class centuries in 1935 , his third year at Oxford and his fourth of ten seasons of first @-@ class cricket . The hundred , like all his previous ones , was scored for the university ; he reached 113 runs in the second innings of a defeat to Surrey . Seamer struggled for runs in his other matches for the university that year , and in the contest against Cambridge , he scored four and three in a game which Cambridge won easily . In nine innings for Somerset that season , he never scored more than 17 runs and averaged 7 @.@ 11 . 
 Seamer graduated in 1935 , but returned to Oxford for a further year to study Arabic . In his final year of cricket at Oxford , he only appeared in three matches : he was not required to bat in either innings against the Free Foresters , and only batted once against Leicestershire , scoring 5 runs . Out of form and not required for the university team , he went off to play for Somerset in the match against Cambridge University and scored 68 . He followed that with a further game for Somerset in which he was not successful and travelled with the Somerset side for the next match against Glamorgan at Llanelli , but Mitchell @-@ Innes , as Oxford captain , called him up as cover for the injured Roger Kimpton ; on the morning of the match , The Times reported that Kimpton was likely to play and Seamer would be stood down . In the event , Kimpton failed his fitness test and Seamer 's final match for the university team was the University match against Cambridge , and as in the previous year , Oxford suffered a heavy defeat . Seamer scored 11 runs in the first innings , and then when Oxford were asked to follow on , he batted tenaciously to reach 43 runs , which forced Cambridge to bat again . Requiring 17 runs to win , Cambridge chased the total down in 5 @.@ 4 overs with eight wickets to spare . In total , Seamer played 21 matches for Oxford , scoring 1 @,@ 059 runs at an average of 35 @.@ 30 . 
 = = = Hockey at Oxford = = = 
 While Seamer won three Blues for cricket , he was even more successful as a field hockey player , appearing in the University hockey match four times . In his first year at the university , he was a late call @-@ up to the team for the big match when the regular right wing @-@ half , M. Martin Harvey , was ill . For the 1933 – 34 season , when he was secretary of the hockey club , he moved to right @-@ back and won a second Blue . For the 1934 / 35 season , Seamer was captain of hockey at Oxford . The university match in February 1935 , in which Seamer again played at right @-@ back , was a goal @-@ less draw in which defences proved too strong for the forwards on either side . Seamer 's reappearance in Oxford for his Arabic course after graduation meant that he was available for the university hockey team in the 1935 / 36 season as well : the 1936 university match , due to be played at Beckenham on 15 February , had to be postponed because of dense fog on the day . The match was played a week later on a pitch that was , according to the report in The Times , pretty much waterlogged , and Seamer and his fellow back Leeming were credited with enabling Oxford to emerge with a 1 – 1 draw : Seamer set up the attack that led to the Oxford goal and overall " Oxford owed much to their backs , J. W. Seamer and J. A. Leeming , whose defence , although becoming a trifle wild in the second half , was the saving of the side " . 
 = = County cricket = = 
 On the completion of his extra year learning Arabic at Oxford , Seamer joined the Sudan Political Service . He continued to play cricket for Somerset during his periods of leave , but it dramatically reduced his availability for the county . During his time at Oxford , Seamer had become good friends with Mitchell @-@ Innes ; the pair both attended the same college , and played together for both the university and Somerset . When Mitchell @-@ Innes graduated from Oxford the year after Seamer , he joined his friend in the Sudan , where the pair often organised cricket matches , despite the extreme heat . Seamer 's duties prevented him from playing for Somerset at all during 1937 , but he appeared eight times the following year through May and early June . His average that season was the highest he achieved after leaving university , recording 20 @.@ 78 from his 14 innings , though his highest score was 47 runs , scored against Derbyshire . In 1939 , the last season of first @-@ class county cricket in England before the Second World War , Seamer played seven times for Somerset . However , unlike his appearances the previous year , in which he had generally batted as part of the top order , Seamer predominantly appeared in the middle order for the county in 1939 , and his highest score was 28 . 
 After the conclusion of the war , county cricket resumed in 1946 , during which year Seamer played two matches with little success . He did not appear in first @-@ class cricket in 1947 , but was named as one of three captains of Somerset in 1948 . Jack Meyer had reluctantly captained the side in 1947 , but stepped down at the end of the season : he was having problems with his sight , and required daily painkillers for lumbago . There was no obvious replacement for Meyer ; like many counties Somerset would not consider having a professional captain , and finding an amateur with the time and money to lead the side was proving troublesome . So , with no single candidate suitable , the Somerset committee announced that the club would be captained first by Mitchell @-@ Innes during his leave from the Sudan , then Seamer during his own leave . Once both of these had returned to their duties , George Woodhouse would take over . In his history of Somerset County Cricket Club , Peter Roebuck describes the situation as a " remarkable state of affairs " , while David Foot suggests that the true number of captains was closer to seven . During his time as captain , Seamer carried an old train board saying " To Tonbridge " in his cricket bag , claiming that it brought good luck to the team . In the eleven matches that Somerset played under his captaincy though , only one resulted in a victory . Seamer claimed that some of his best friends at the club were among the professionals , who he praised for their team spirit , despite the strained leadership changes . His friendship with the professionals was in contrast to the attitudes of both the club 's committee , and its captain for the previous season . Meyer had been unpopular with the professionals due to his attitude to the game , and the manner in which he utilised them , while the club 's committee felt that the professional players deserved little recognition when successful , claiming that this was what they were paid for . Seamer 's batting was no longer strong enough to support his inclusion in the team , and he played low in the middle order . He failed to reach double figures in any of his first seven innings that season , but recorded a half @-@ century against Kent in his final match for Somerset , his first since 1936 in first @-@ class cricket . 
 Seamer did not appear again for Somerset after his period as captain in 1948 . In total for the county , he scored 1 @,@ 405 runs at an average of 15 @.@ 61 . He made his final first @-@ class appearance the following season , appearing for the Free Foresters against Oxford University . He later made three Minor Counties Championship appearances for Wiltshire in 1956 , though without much success . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Seamer married <unk> Dorothy Lee , and had two children , Katherine Judith and Mary . By 1948 Seamer had risen to be the district commissioner for Khartoum North . When he left the Sudan Political Service in 1950 , he returned to England and took up a teaching position at his old school , Marlborough College . In addition to teaching Latin , English and history , he became a housemaster , before his retirement in 1973 . He served as mayor of Marlborough twice , and as a justice of the peace , and was awarded Freedom of the City in 2001 . He died , following an illness on 16 April 2006 , aged 92 . 
 = = Personality and style = = 
 A personable man , Seamer was a popular captain of Somerset . He had some quirks to his personality , and Roebuck goes as far as describing him as an eccentric . During his childhood he would often cycle from his home in Shapwick to Taunton , a distance of over 15 miles , to watch Somerset play cricket . When he began playing for the county , prior to starting at Oxford University , a number of his childhood heroes were still in the side . In one match , Seamer had been dismissed , and passed one of these heroes , Jack White coming to the wicket . White asked what kind of bowler Jim Cornford was , as he had not seen him play before . Seamer , unsure , bluffed and stated that he bowled outswingers . Shortly afterwards , White returned to the dressing room , irate , and declared " the fellow bowls bloody inswingers . " <unk> , Seamer dressed smartly and was proud of his Somerset heritage , often putting on a broad accent when he was in London . 
 Unlike most amateurs of the time , Seamer prioritised defensive play when batting ; he watched the ball and minimised the risks , valuing his own wicket . This careful style was exemplified by his innings in the University match of 1934 , when he helped Oxford salvage a draw by batting for two hours with the tail , during which time he scored 24 runs . Despite his circumspect batting technique , Seamer enjoyed his cricket , and in a more relaxed setting he once scored a century before lunch : playing in the Sudan , the match started at seven in the morning to avoid the worst of the heat . Before their opponent 's innings , Seamer and his team @-@ mates got them drunk to improve their chances of a win . 
 = Savoy Truffle = 
 " Savoy Truffle " is a song by the English rock group the Beatles from their 1968 album The Beatles ( also known as " the White Album " ) . The song was written by George Harrison and inspired by his friend Eric Clapton 's fondness for chocolate . The lyrics list the various flavours offered in Mackintosh 's Good News chocolates and serve as a warning to Clapton about the detrimental effect that his gorging would have on his teeth . Along with Clapton 's guest appearance on the White Album track " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " and Harrison reciprocating on Cream 's " Badge " , it is one of several songs that mark the start of a long @-@ lasting friendship between the two musicians . 
 The Beatles recorded " Savoy Truffle " in October 1968 , towards the end of the five @-@ month sessions for the album . An upbeat rock track in the soul genre , the song reflects Harrison 's return to the guitar as his main musical instrument after two years of studying the Indian sitar . The recording includes a Chris Thomas @-@ arranged horn section , and introduced the horn @-@ heavy sound that became a feature of Harrison 's music as a solo artist . Through the lyrics ' reference to " Ob @-@ La @-@ Di , Ob @-@ La @-@ Da " , the song is also an example of the Beatles ' use of self @-@ quotation in their later work . 
 On release , " Savoy Truffle " was viewed by many commentators as a sign of Harrison 's growing maturity as a songwriter . Among more recent assessments , Ian MacDonald cited it as an example of the lesser material found on The Beatles , while Daryl Easlea of BBC Music describes it as one of the " doodles that delight " and " a fine counterweight " to " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " . Ella Fitzgerald , Terry Manning and They Might Be Giants have also recorded the song . 
 = = Background and inspiration = = 
 George Harrison wrote " Savoy Truffle " in September 1968 , by which point the Beatles had been working on their self @-@ titled double album ( often known as " the White Album " ) for over three months . While this period was one of disharmony within the group , he was increasingly spending time with Eric Clapton , leading to occasional musical collaborations between the two guitarists and a lifelong friendship . Having contributed to Harrison 's solo album Wonderwall Music , Clapton was invited to play on his White Album track " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " , marking a rare appearance by another rock musician on a Beatles recording as Harrison sought to diffuse tensions within the band . 
 Harrison wrote " Savoy Truffle " as a tribute to Clapton 's chocolate addiction . He derived the title and much of the lyrics from a box of Mackintosh 's Good News chocolates , which Clapton began eating during one of his visits to Harrison 's home . Many of the confectionery names used in the song are authentic ; others , such as cherry cream , coconut fudge and pineapple heart , were Harrison 's invention , based on the flavours listed inside the lid of the box . For the lyrics to the second of the song 's middle eight sections , Harrison received assistance from Derek Taylor , the press officer for the Beatles ' new record label , Apple Records . In keeping with the theme of Harrison 's composition , Taylor drew inspiration from the title of the American counterculture film You Are What You Eat , which was itself titled after a fashionable <unk> slogan . 
 Musicologist Walter Everett suggests that " Savoy Truffle " might have been an attempt to rewrite the Byrds ' " less innocent " 1968 track " Artificial Energy " , which warns of the dangers of amphetamines . The song also reflects Harrison 's rediscovery of his passion for rhythm and blues . Coinciding with this , he had returned to the guitar as his main instrument in 1968 , after two years of studying the sitar under the guidance of Indian classical musician Ravi Shankar . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Savoy Truffle " is primarily in the key of E minor , although the melody continually shifts to the parallel , major equivalent , in addition to anchoring briefly in G major . Musicologist Alan Pollack identifies the composition 's harmonic style as one that " makes you feel constantly on the move , on the threshold of some new breakthrough " , and he adds : " There are other Beatles ' songs that exploit this triumvirate of keys ( i.e. a parallel Major / minor pair and the relative Major ) , but never quite with such audacity . " Throughout , the metre is 4 / 4 , delivered in an assertive , driving tempo . The song 's main musical style is soul music , while its melody and mood partly recall " Sour Milk Sea " , which Harrison wrote earlier in 1968 . 
 In the opening verse , Harrison lists a variety of chocolate flavours and employs wordplay to incorporate the Mackintosh brand name in his closing phrase , " yes , you know it 's ' good news ' " . The refrain throughout the song , " But you 'll have to have them all pulled out after the savoy truffle " , refers to the deterioration of one 's teeth after eating too many sweets , echoing the warning that Clapton had recently received from his dentist . 
 Over the second middle eight , Harrison adapted Taylor 's suggestion to read " You know that what you eat you are " . In the same section , a subsequent line names the track " Ob @-@ La @-@ Di , Ob @-@ La @-@ Da " , a Paul McCartney composition that would also appear on The Beatles . In this way , " Savoy Truffle " continued a tradition initiated by John Lennon in 1967 , particularly in his lyrics to " I Am the Walrus " , whereby the Beatles deliberately quoted from their previous songs . 
 Since " Ob @-@ La @-@ Di , Ob @-@ La @-@ Da " was not a song that McCartney 's bandmates enjoyed recording , the motive behind Harrison 's appropriation of the title has invited speculation . Author Jeffrey <unk> considers it significant that Harrison mispronounces the title ; in addition , he contends that the full statement – " We all know Ob @-@ la @-@ di @-@ bla @-@ da / But can you show me where you are ? " – serves as an example of Harrison , like Lennon , mocking those listeners who obsessively scanned the Beatles ' lyrics for " clues " . Music journalist Robert Fontenot interprets the lines as an expression of distaste for " Ob @-@ La @-@ Di , Ob @-@ La @-@ Da " , since Harrison and Lennon were openly critical of McCartney 's composition . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The Beatles taped the basic track for " Savoy Truffle " at Trident Studios in London on 3 October 1968 , the day after Harrison had recorded his and Clapton 's song " Badge " for Cream 's forthcoming album . With Lennon absent , the line @-@ up on this rhythm track was Harrison on electric guitar , McCartney on bass , and Ringo Starr on drums . Overdubs took place on 5 October , again at Trident , and then on 11 and 14 October , at EMI 's Abbey Road Studios . Chris Thomas , as assistant to the Beatles ' producer , George Martin , played electric piano on the song . 
 During the 11 October session , six saxophonists ( three baritone and three tenor ) performed brass overdubs , arranged by Thomas . These horn players were all veterans of the British jazz scene and included Art Ellefson and Ronnie Ross . Ken Scott , the Beatles ' recording engineer , recalls that Harrison thought the saxophones sounded " too clean ... too nice " and so asked that they be treated with heavy distortion . Scott also cites Harrison 's curt dismissal of Martin 's objections , that the song sounded too " <unk> " , as evidence of the Beatles ' growing independence during the making of the White Album – a project in which Martin played a mainly peripheral role . In author Nicholas Schaffner 's description , the song 's " beefy horns " became " a trademark " of Harrison 's work following the Beatles ' break @-@ up in 1970 . 
 The 14 October date marked the final recording session for The Beatles . With Starr away in Sardinia , the overdubs consisted of another lead guitar part by Harrison , and organ , tambourine and bongos . While author Ian MacDonald lists Thomas as the organ player on the track , other writers credit Harrison . In his description of the finished recording , Jonathan Gould notes the aptness of Harrison 's vocal delivery , where the list of chocolate flavours " roll off George 's tongue like a catalog of life 's little pleasures " , and the effectiveness of his guitar solo , which , further to the lyric 's warnings regarding tooth decay , is " pitched to the register of a dentist 's drill " . 
 Mixing on " Savoy Truffle " was also completed on 14 October , after which Harrison left for Los Angeles to produce Jackie Lomax 's album Is This What You Want ? The stereo and mono mixes of the song differ in their editing of the lead guitar parts ; in addition , the mono version omits the organ over the third verse . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Apple Records released The Beatles on 22 November 1968 . " Savoy Truffle " was sequenced as the third track on side four of the double LP , between " Honey Pie " and " Cry Baby Cry " . As with Harrison 's other three contributions to the album , including " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " , the song was viewed by many commentators as a sign of his growing maturity as a songwriter beside Lennon and McCartney . 
 Due to the Beatles ' use of pastiche , parody , irony and , in the case of " Savoy Truffle " and Lennon 's " Glass Onion " , self @-@ quotation , the album 's lyrics were intensely analysed by contemporary reviewers . Alan Walsh of Melody Maker described " Savoy Truffle " as " a rocker that 's the most obscure track lyrically " . Record Mirror 's reviewer speculated that the song " could either be a delicate and expensive sweet or a new dance . It could be a delivery on the pomposities of intricate desserts or a depiction of the ' upper ' class . " The writer then concluded : " Whatever it is , it swings . " 
 In his review for International Times , Barry Miles wrote : " George 's ' Savoy Truffle ' is the best track on this [ LP ] side . Beautiful , impressionistic music . Don 't miss this one . " Jann Wenner of Rolling Stone praised Harrison 's lead guitar playing throughout the album and highlighted the song as an example of the Beatles ' success in progressing on their past work , in this case by creating " a more sophisticated look at ' Lucy In the Sky With Diamonds ' " . 
 = = Retrospective assessment = = 
 Given the lack of stylistic unity across its 30 tracks , many authors have since scrutinised the content of The Beatles with regard to Martin 's assertion that the album would have benefited from being scaled down to a single disc . In his book Revolution in the Head , Ian MacDonald dismisses " Savoy Truffle " as " space @-@ filling " and " as pointless as [ ' Honey Pie ' ] " . In a 2003 review for Mojo magazine , however , he described it more favourably as " an efficient jeu d 'esprit " . Author Alan Clayson has questioned its inclusion in light of Harrison having more substantial compositions that went unrecorded by the band , and , in the case of " Not Guilty " , a song that the Beatles recorded but then rejected for the White Album . In his attempt to reduce the 1968 release to a single LP , Mark Caro of the Chicago Tribune listed all of Harrison 's contributions except for " Savoy Truffle " , which he included in his " toughest deletions " category , along with three Lennon @-@ written songs . Writing in The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , Rob Sheffield acknowledged that such scrutiny had long been part of the double album 's legacy , and he described the track as being " among the Beatles ' finest songs " . 
 Beatles biographer Philip Norman considers " Savoy Truffle " to be " the album 's best piece of rock and roll " after McCartney 's " Back in the U.S.S.R. " While admiring the interplay between the saxophones and lead guitar as " rousing rock- ' n ' -roll confectionery " , Tim Riley views the song as one of the " essentials " on The Beatles and , with regard to the " sheer feel " of the performance , Harrison 's most successful contribution to the band 's discography since " I Want to Tell You " in 1966 . Former Creem critic Richard Riegel included " Savoy Truffle " on his 1996 list of the ten most underrated Beatles tracks , saying : " this is a great song by any standard , certainly the most fun George would have in the sensual world for many years to come . ' Savoy Truffle ' is wonderfully British psychedelic throwaway pop , much like Cream on their pop @-@ tarty Disraeli Gears , recorded back when Eric Clapton was a mortal , too . " 
 Among more recent reviews , Daryl Easlea of BBC Music cites " Savoy Truffle " as an example of " the doodles that delight " on the White Album , and he describes it as " a fine counterweight " to " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " . Mark Kemp , writing for Paste , highlights the same pair of tracks as " two of Harrison 's finest moments ( ' While My Guitar Gently Weeps , ' with Eric Clapton wailing on lead guitar , and the surrealistic soul of ' Savoy Truffle ' ) " . 
 In 2015 , " Savoy Truffle " was ranked 66th in the NME 's list " 100 Greatest Beatles Songs As Chosen By Music 's A @-@ <unk> " . Staff writer Leonie Cooper admired its subject matter and described the track as a " typically off @-@ kilter " Harrison composition . In Consequence of Sound 's feature article celebrating the 45th anniversary of The Beatles , <unk> Vally provided commentary on the track , describing it as " on fire " and adding : " The guitar solo is instantly classic ... This song is so ahead of its time , music STILL hasn 't caught up to it . " 
 = = Cover versions and remixes = = 
 Jazz singer Ella Fitzgerald covered " Savoy Truffle " on her 1969 album Ella , produced by Richard Perry . The following year , Terry Manning included the song on his album Home Sweet Home . The recording features Robert Moog on synthesizer and has been described by PopMatters as " long , freaked out " and " sublimely excessive " . 
 Phish included " Savoy Truffle " in their performance of The Beatles on Halloween 1994 , which was released in 2002 as Live Phish Volume 13 . The song was They Might Be Giants ' contribution to the 2003 compilation Songs from the Material World : A Tribute to George Harrison . 
 Along with a sample of the Beatles ' " Glass Onion " , the song was mashed with Jay @-@ Z 's " Encore " for a track on Danger Mouse 's The Grey Album in 2004 . For the Beatles ' 2006 remix album Love , the track 's horn parts were mixed into " Drive My Car " . Dhani Harrison performed " Savoy Truffle " at the George Fest tribute concert , held at the Fonda Theatre in Los Angeles on 28 September 2014 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 According to Ian MacDonald : 
 The Beatles 
 George Harrison – double @-@ tracked vocal , rhythm guitar , lead guitars 
 Paul McCartney – harmony vocal , bass guitar 
 Ringo Starr – drums , tambourine 
 Additional musicians 
 Chris Thomas – electric piano , organ , horn arrangement 
 Art Ellefson – tenor saxophone 
 Danny Moss – tenor saxophone 
 Derek Collins – tenor saxophone 
 Ronnie Ross – baritone saxophone 
 Harry Klein – baritone saxophone 
 Bernard George – baritone saxophone 
 = Bart 's Friend Falls in Love = 
 " Bart 's Friend Falls in Love " is the twenty @-@ third episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 7 , 1992 . In the episode , Bart 's best friend Milhouse falls in love with the new girl in school , Samantha <unk> . Milhouse and Samantha spend all their free time together , leaving Bart feeling jealous and excluded . In order to ruin their relationship , Bart tells Samantha 's strict father about it . As a punishment , Samantha is sent to an all @-@ girls Catholic school , while Milhouse is left behind heartbroken . Meanwhile , Homer orders a subliminal cassette tape to help him lose weight , but is accidentally sent one that helps him increase his vocabulary after the weight @-@ loss tapes sell out . 
 The episode was written by Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky , and directed by Jim Reardon . American actress Kimmy Robertson guest starred in the episode as Samantha . The opening sequence of " Bart 's Friend Falls in Love " is a parody of the film Raiders of the Lost Ark , while the closing sequence parodies the film Casablanca . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 4 and was the fourth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While riding the bus to school , Milhouse shows Bart his new fortune @-@ telling toy , a Magic 8 ball . Bart asks the ball whether he and Milhouse will still be friends by the end of the day , and the ball predicts they will not . Both are puzzled by how this could happen . A new girl from Phoenix , Samantha Stanky , starts at Springfield Elementary School the same day , and Milhouse instantly falls in love with her . To Bart 's dismay and anger , Milhouse and Samantha start a relationship and , rather than playing with Bart after school in his treehouse , Milhouse brings Samantha with him and spends the entire time hugging and kissing her . They ignore Bart , leaving nothing for him to do but leave in tears . 
 Milhouse and Samantha spend all their free time together . Jealous and feeling excluded , Bart reveals their relationship to Samantha 's father . Before Samantha can explain , Mr. Stanky rushes to Bart 's treehouse and sends her to Saint Sebastian 's School for Wicked Girls , an all @-@ girls convent school run by French @-@ Canadian nuns . After seeing Milhouse heartbroken , Bart begins to feel guilty for what he did . Bart and Milhouse start fighting after Bart reveals that he <unk> to Samantha 's father . After calming down , the two boys visit Samantha at the convent school , and Bart apologizes to her . Samantha says she loves Saint Sebastian 's , but she still has feelings for Milhouse and gives him a goodbye kiss , despite knowing it is violating the school rules . 
 In the subplot , Lisa worries that Homer 's obesity will lead to an early death . On Lisa 's suggestion , Marge orders a subliminal weight loss tape for Homer . However , the company is out of weight loss tapes and sends Homer a " Vocabulary Builder " tape instead , unbeknownst to Marge and the family . Homer puts on the headphones in bed and falls asleep . When he wakes up , he is suddenly articulate , but ends up eating more food than ever . Once he realizes the tape has not helped him lose weight , Homer gets rid of it and his vocabulary quickly returns to normal . 
 = = Production and allusions = = 
 The episode was written by Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky , and directed by Jim Reardon . American actress Kimmy Robertson guest starred in the episode as Samantha . She recorded all of her lines separately , instead of acting them out with the cast of the show in the recording studio as it is usually done . Robertson said of the role : " I had no idea how popular I was going to be after I did that . All my friends think I 'm the bee 's knees now . I 've made it . " The physical appearance of Samantha is based on Kogen 's niece , who is also named Samantha . 
 The episode 's opening sequence parodies that of the Steven Spielberg film Raiders of the Lost Ark ( 1981 ) . Bart , in the role of Indiana Jones , steals a penny jar ( instead of a Fertility Idol ) from Homer before heading to school on the bus . Homer , standing in for the boulder and the Hovitos tribe , angrily runs after Bart. While Bart runs through the house , Maggie fires suction darts instead of arrows . Bart is able to narrowly pass through the closing garage door and escape . As Bart steps onto the bus , Homer is seen the distance shouting after him . John Williams 's theme song from Raiders of the Lost Ark , " Raiders March " , plays throughout the sequence . The producers had to contact Spielberg in order to clear the rights for the song so that they could use it in the episode . Paul Wee was the layout artist for the sequence . Marge 's voice actor , Julie Kavner , praised it for focusing on the animation and not having any dialog in it . 
 The episode 's closing sequence in which Bart and Milhouse visit Samantha at Saint Sebastian 's is a reference to the film Casablanca . One nun leads a group of children and sings " Dominique " , a song by The Singing Nun . Cast member Maggie Roswell provided the voice of the nun , but did she not know the actual French lyrics to the song so she made up her own . The writers had difficulties coming up with an idea for the end of the episode . Executive producer James L. Brooks pitched the idea of Samantha getting shipped off to a Catholic school with " fun nuns " that are like The Singing Nun . Other references in the episode include a scene in which Lisa reads a magazine with the headline " The Year 2525 - were Zager & Evans Right ? " , referring to musicians Zager and Evans and their song " In the Year 2525 " . In reference to the play Romeo and Juliet , Milhouse says that Samantha and his relationship started like Romeo and Juliet , but ended in tragedy , unaware that the play also ends in tragedy . Milhouse 's original line in the scene was " It feel like somebody gave my heart a wedgie . " Milhouse has a poster in his room featuring an X @-@ wing from the Star Wars franchise . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Bart 's Friend Falls in Love " finished 35th in the ratings for the week of May 4 – 10 , 1992 , with a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 4 , equivalent to approximately 11 @.@ 4 million viewing households . It was the fourth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Beverly Hills , 90210 , In Living Color , and Married ... with Children . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , said the episode was " a fitting end to a season that had seen The Simpsons consolidate its success and become even more daring and intelligent . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson said that " from the ingenious and hilarious Raiders of the Lost Ark parody at the show ’ s start , ' Bart 's Friend Falls in Love ' is a keeper . It actually develops the characters and gets into pre @-@ teen emotions but never becomes sappy . The ' B ' <unk> in which Lisa tries to get Homer to lose weight provides terrific laughs as well . " 
 Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed gave the episode a 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 rating and commented that " It 's tough to view Milhouse in a romantic relationship , especially since the most recent seasons have made a point of hinting at Milhouse being gay . Still , the love triangle makes for some interesting drama and the script 's observations about childhood infatuations are right on point . " Bill Gibron of DVD Verdict , however , thought the plot seemed drawn out and " only Homer 's eating disorder and subliminal tape attempts at weight loss have lasting appeal . Since the tape turns out to be a vocabulary builder , hearing Homer expound in flowery language is a real , rare treat . " The Santa Fe New Mexican 's Jeff Acker also preferred the subplot over the main plot . 
 The episode 's Raiders of the Lost Ark parody was named the greatest film reference in the history of the show by Nathan Ditum of Total Film . Empire 's Colin Kennedy also named it the best film parody in the show , calling it the series ' " most famous opening sequence . " He noted Homer played " both his roles – half @-@ naked native ; big fat boulder – with consummate aplomb . " The Canadian television series The Hour , hosted by George Stroumboulopoulos , ranked the Raiders of the Lost Ark parody as the greatest in the " Top Five Male Underwear Moments of All Time " . The list referred to scenes in film and television portraying men in underwear , and Homer wore underwear in the relevant scene . 
 = 2011 – 12 Princeton Tigers men 's basketball team = 
 The 2011 – 12 Princeton Tigers men 's basketball team represented Princeton University during the 2011 – 12 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season . The Tigers , led by first year head coach Mitch Henderson , played their home games at Jadwin Gymnasium and are members of the Ivy League . The team captains were seniors Douglas Davis and Patrick Saunders . They finished the season 20 – 12 , 10 – 4 in Ivy League play to finish in third place . They were invited to the 2012 College Basketball Invitational where they defeated Evansville in the first round before falling in the quarterfinals to Pittsburgh . The season was highlighted by wins over a ranked Harvard team and the Florida State Seminoles . The team was led by unanimous first team All @-@ Ivy League selection Ian Hummer and second team selection Douglas Davis . 
 = = Preview = = 
 Princeton entered the season having won the 2010 – 11 Ivy League men 's basketball season championship and having earned the resulting 2011 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament invitation . The team entered the season having lost senior captains Dan Mavraides and Kareem Maddox . Maddox was the reigning Ivy League Defensive Player of the Year and a unanimous first team All @-@ Ivy selection . Mavraides had been a second team All @-@ Ivy selection . The team returned second team All @-@ Ivy selection Hummer . 
 Entering the 2011 – 12 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season head coach Mitch Henderson began his tenure at Princeton , taking over for Sydney Johnson . With the move that resulted from Johnson taking a new coaching job , Princeton has six alumni who are active Division I head coaches , a total second only to eight by the North Carolina Tar Heels men 's basketball program . The Ivy League media poll selected Princeton to be tied with Yale for second place behind Harvard . Princeton had been the preseason favorite the year before . 
 = = Roster = = 
 = = Schedule = = 
 With a new first @-@ time head coach , the team got off to slow starts . It started the season with a 1 – 5 record , but won 18 of its final 24 games and started its conference schedule with a 2 – 3 record , but won 8 of its final 9 games . The recovery enabled the team to qualify for its 32nd post season appearance ( 24 NCAA , 5 NIT and 2 CBI ) . 
 Princeton earned its first home win against a ranked opponent since the 1976 – 77 team 's January 3 , 1977 victory over Notre Dame by defeating Harvard ( No. 21 Coaches / 25 AP ) on February 11 , 2012 . The win was also its first against a ranked opponent on any court since November 11 , 1997 , which is when the 1997 – 98 team opened its season with a victory over a ranked Texas team at Meadowlands Arena ( now named Izod Center ) in East Rutherford , NJ . Princeton also defeated eventual 2012 ACC Men 's Basketball Tournament Champion Florida State five weeks after Harvard did as well as Big East Conference member and New Jersey rival Rutgers . In addition , the team 's schedule included the ACC 's NC State . Its results against Harvard , Florida State and NC State give the team a 2 – 2 record against teams in the 2012 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . 
 For the 18th consecutive season , the Ivy League men 's basketball schedule concluded with a Tuesday Penn – Princeton basketball rivalry game against the 2011 – 12 Quakers . Princeton 's 62 – 52 victory enabled it to retain slim 26 – 25 and 24 – 23 leads in terms of Ivy League Championships and Ivy League team NCAA Tournament appearances , respectively . 
 In the first round of the 2012 CBI Tournament , senior Douglas Davis scored a career @-@ high 31 points to lead Princeton to a 95 – 86 victory over Evansville . Although Davis posted another 20 points in the subsequent quarterfinal game against Pittsburgh to surpass Kit Mueller for second place on the Princeton scoring list , Princeton lost 82 – 61 to end the season . Davis ' appearance in the March 19 contest also enabled him to surpass Ryan Wittman as the Ivy League 's all @-@ time leader in games played ( 122 ) . Pittsburgh eventually went on to win the tournament . 
 = = = All @-@ Ivy = = = 
 The following players earned Ivy League postseason recognition : 
 First Team All @-@ Ivy 
 ^ Ian Hummer , Princeton ( Jr . , F , Vienna , Va . ) 
 Second Team All @-@ Ivy 
 Douglas Davis , Princeton ( Sr. , G , Philadelphia ) 
 ^ Unanimous Selection 
 = = = Other = = = 
 The National Association of Basketball Coaches announced their Division I All ‐ District District 13 team on March 14 , recognizing the nation ’ s best men ’ s collegiate basketball student @-@ athletes . Ian Hummer was a second team selection . 
 = Return the Favor = 
 " Return the Favor " is a song by American recording artist and songwriter Keri Hilson . The song features Timbaland , who wrote the song with Hilson and her songwriting / production team The Clutch , as well as Walter Milsap . Following the moderate international chart success of Hilson ’ s lead single , " Energy " , " Return the Favor " was released from Hilson 's debut album , In a Perfect World ... , serving as the international second single while the urban single , " Turnin Me On " was released in the US . 
 As Hilson 's second vocal collaboration with mentor Timbaland , Hilson stated the purpose of the song 's initial conception was to re @-@ create the success of their worldwide hit , " The Way I Are " , as Timbaland called the " Return the Favor " bigger and better . Contemporary critics gave the song mixed reviews , noting the production and vocal similarities to " The Way I Are " , preferring the latter track . 
 The song reached the top twenty in the United Kingdom , Ireland , and Germany , while appearing in the top thirty of Austria and Sweden , charting in Australia and the tip charts in Belgium . The accompanying music video implements a futuristic concept and features Hilson sporting several extravagant outfits . 
 = = Background = = 
 When Hilson talked to Digital Spy about the song , she said that Timbaland called her and said , " I 've got a song that I think 's better than ' The Way I Are ' . I think it 's bigger . " They took the track and wrote " Return the Favor " over the beat . According to Hilson , she said that song was partially inspired by " that conversational , back @-@ and @-@ forth thing " they did on " The Way I Are " , stating , " We got a great response from that that we wanted to do it again . " The initial draft of the hook featured the line " If you kiss me then I ’ ll kiss you back " , but according to Hilson in an interview with That Grape Juice , it was changed by unknown reason by Timbaland . After it was reported that In a Perfect World ... would be pushed back to October 2008 , " Return the Favor " surfaced online , and it was rumored to be the follow @-@ up to " Energy . " The sample was later removed by Hilson 's management , before it was announced as the album 's second single . The song was featured on December 15 , 2008 episode of The Hills . 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 " Return the Favor " is described as an electro @-@ dance @-@ pop record , with a future @-@ like sound , including euro @-@ style synths . Dan Nishimoto of Prefix Magazine noted that the song includes Timbaland 's " signature dizzying 22nd @-@ century flair that he 's been employing ever since 2006 . " Andy Kellman of Allmusic noted the song as a standout track from In a Perfect World .... According to J.K. Glei of Cincinnati Metromix said the song has " cascading synths , " and a " classic pop structure . " However Glei said that Hilson 's vocals " feel flat against the driving beat " and that Timbaland " fully phones it in . " While noting the song " follows the same blueprint " of Nelly Furtado 's " Promiscuous " , Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine said it was a " satisfying pop romp " and said even though Hilson lacked Furtado 's distinctiveness , that it " shouldn 't have a problem striking a chord at radio . " 
 Nick Levine of Digital Spy said , the song was " a perfectly decent slice of midtempo Timba @-@ pop , but it 's not really in the same league as the brilliant ' The Way I Are ' . " MTV Buzzworthy said " slightly less out @-@ there are the beats -- which sound an awful lot like Hilson and Timbaland 's first collaboration , " The Way I Are " — and the cameo from Timba himself .. " Sophie Bruce of BBC Music thought that the song lacked the a catchy hook such as in " The Way I Are . " Less than impressed with Timbaland 's rapping and " less than sexy " vocal appeal , Jon Caramanica of The New York Times said the " unfortunate pairing " was reprised , and the song " encapsulates the record ’ s shortcomings . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Return the Favor " was the most successful in the United Kingdom and Ireland , peaking at nineteen in both countries . In Austria , the song debuted and peaked at twenty @-@ five on the Austrian Singles Chart , before falling off after six weeks . On the Swedish Singles Chart , It debuted and peaked at thirty , before falling off after six weeks on the chart . In Belgium , " Return the <unk> " appeared on Belgian Tip Charts , peaking at six in Flanders , and seventeen Wallonia . While debuting and peaking at twenty @-@ one on the German Singles Chart , it completed nine weeks on the chart before falling off . It made the lower regions of the ARIA Singles Chart appearing at eighty . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Melina , who directed Hilson 's video for " Energy . " A preview of the video was released on October 14 , 2008 , and the full video premiered on October 23 , 2008 . Featuring a futuristic concept , the video begins with a small clip from Timbaland and Hilson 's " The Way I Are " , before it cuts to Hilson dancing in a future @-@ like room while scenes are shown on a wall behind Timbaland , who is seated in a chair . Hilson is then show in a pink ruffled bra and dress dancing in front of mirrors , and then rises out of a pool in a blue swimsuit while scenes continue to be broadcast behind a seated Timbaland . Intercut with scenes with previous attire , Hilson performs ensemble choreography with dancers while wearing a black bra and pants , whilst the video ends with several different scenes . 
 MTV Buzzworthy commended the video , stating , " while her ensemble 's slightly more <unk> ( we 're looking at YOU , futuristic metallic <unk> ! ) Hilson still manages to look beyond gorge . But then again , this chick could look cutting @-@ edge in a giant pickle barrel . " The review also compared Timbaland 's look a cross between Run D.M.C. and The Matrix . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Songwriters - Timothy Mosley , Keri Hilson , Ezekiel Lewis , <unk> Muhammed , Patrick Smith , Candice Nelson , Walter Millsap III 
 Production - Timbaland 
 Editors - Walter Millsap III , Dave ( d @-@ lo ) , Marcella Araica 
 Recording - Scott Naughton 
 Mixing - Demacio Castellon 
 Vocal arrangement - The Clutch 
 Additional production , vocal production - Walter Millsap III 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Isaac Davis ( soldier ) = 
 Isaac Davis ( February 23 , 1745 – April 19 , 1775 ) was a gunsmith and a militia officer who commanded a company of Minutemen from Acton , Massachusetts , during the first battle of the American Revolutionary War . In the months leading up to the Revolution , Davis set unusually high standards for his company in terms of equipment , training , and preparedness . His company was selected to lead the advance on the British Regulars during the Battle of Concord because his men were entirely outfitted with bayonets . During the American advance on the British at the Old North Bridge , Davis was among the first killed and was the first American officer to die in the Revolution . 
 Davis is memorialized through the Isaac Davis Monument on the Acton Town Common . He was also the inspiration behind The Minute Man ( 1875 ) , the sculpture at the Old North Bridge by Daniel Chester French . The sculpture , which French attempted to model after Isaac Davis , is now an iconic national symbol . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and family = = = 
 Davis was born February 23 , 1745 in the village of West Acton to <unk> Davis ( b . 1717 ) and Mary ( nee Gibson ) Davis ( 1725 @-@ 1773 ) . He married Hannah Brown ( born 1746 ) on October 24 , 1764 . They had four children — two boys and two girls . 
 = = = Preparations for war = = = 
 During the early 1770s , many inhabitants of the Province of Massachusetts Bay protested taxation policies established by British Parliament . These protests eventually resulted in the military occupation of the provincial capital of Boston , Massachusetts which , consequently caused further unrest . In September 1774 , the military governor , General Thomas Gage , dissolved the Massachusetts General Court , placing the province under martial law . Citizens of Massachusetts formed an extra @-@ legal Massachusetts Provincial Congress to govern the province outside of the rule of the King . In October 1774 , the Massachusetts Provincial Congress recommended that each town establish a company of Minutemen — specially trained militia who could be ready at short notice in the event that the British Regulars in Boston attempted any warlike movements . 
 In November 1774 , Acton formed a company of Minutemen , and Davis was elected captain . He was determined that his company be as well @-@ equipped as the British soldiers . Most provincial Minuteman companies , unlike professional soldiers , were not equipped with bayonets for use in close combat and they typically re @-@ loaded using powder horns , a slow method more suited to hunting than to battle . Davis employed his skills as a gunsmith to outfit nearly every man in his company with a bayonet and saw that his men were supplied with cartridge boxes , allowing his company to re @-@ load as quickly as the British . Finally , Davis emphasized marksmanship , training his company on an improvised shooting range behind his house . These high standards in terms of equipment and training made the Acton company one of the best prepared in Massachusetts . 
 According to tradition , Davis was a superstitious man who believed he had seen numerous omens that indicated that he would die if forced into battle . In 1851 , Rev. James Woodbury , Acton 's representative to the Massachusetts General Court , delivered a speech about Davis to the House of Representatives . During this speech , Woodbury described an incident that allegedly took place a few days before the Battle of Concord in which Davis and his family returned home to find an owl perched on Davis 's musket . According to Woodbury , " It was an ill omen , a bad sign . The sober conclusion was that the first time that Davis went into battle , he would lose his life . " 
 = = = Concord = = = 
 During the early spring of 1775 , Gage planned an expedition to confiscate a large stockpile of gunpowder and weapons kept by the provincials in Concord , Massachusetts . On April 15 , he issued orders to hand @-@ picked companies of British Regulars in Boston , relieving them from their usual duties . Concluding that a British movement was imminent , Paul Revere , a messenger for the provincial Sons of Liberty , was sent to Concord on April 16 to warn the inhabitants . Most of the supplies were removed from Concord , and the Minuteman companies were on alert days before the British marched from Boston . 
 On the night of April 18 , 1775 , Gage dispatched approximately 800 British Regulars under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Francis Smith . The Sons of Liberty in Boston were convinced that the British troops would also attempt to capture the provincial leaders , John Hancock and Samuel Adams , who were in Lexington , Massachusetts . Messengers Paul Revere and William Dawes therefore rode again on the night of April 18 to warn Hancock and Adams that the soldiers were marching from Boston . In Lexington , the British force encountered resistance from the Lexington militia , and a skirmish ensued on Lexington Green ; eight provincials were killed , and one British soldier was wounded . Following the action on Lexington Green , the British marched on to Concord . 
 Word of the British movement reached Acton just before dawn on April 19 , most likely delivered by Dr. Samuel Prescott , a resident of Concord and one of the Sons of Liberty . As the alarm spread , the Acton Minutemen began to gather at Davis 's home . While waiting for others to arrive , the men made paper cartridges and some powdered their hair with flour so as to appear more like gentlemen when they met the British in battle . As the Minutemen prepared , Davis 's wife noticed that he seemed especially somber and said very little . As some of his men joked about getting shot at by a British soldier , Davis rebuked them , reminding them that some of them would soon be killed . 
 Davis formed up his company and ordered them to march at about 7 a.m. According to his wife and other witnesses , shortly after stepping off , Davis ordered his company to halt , then returned to his front door to tell his wife , " Take good care of the children . " Soon after crossing into Concord , the Acton company passed the farm of Colonel James Barrett who commanded the provincial troops in Concord that morning . A small detachment of British soldiers were searching Barrett 's farm for supplies , and Davis considered attacking them . His orders , however , were to muster with the rest of the provincial militia and Minutemen near the Old North Bridge by the Concord River . He then diverted his company off the road , avoiding the British at Barrett 's farm and marching past a tavern belonging to a Widow Brown . A boy named Charles Handley , who lived at Widow Brown 's Tavern , saw Davis 's company pass the tavern . He recalled many years later that a fifer and drummer played a song called " The White Cockade " , a reference to the white ribbon worn on their bonnets by Scots revolutionaries during The ' 45 . Tradition persists that this was Davis 's favorite marching song , but there is little evidence to support this notion . There is also a tradition that the Acton musicians played the White Cockade later when Davis 's company led the advance on the British at the Old North Bridge , although this too is not supported by primary source accounts . 
 Davis 's company reached the area of the Old North Bridge at approximately 9 a.m. Several other companies of militia and Minutemen , consisting of about 500 men from Concord , Lincoln , and Bedford , had already gathered on a small hill overlooking the bridge . Approximately 100 British Regulars occupied the bridge . Shortly after Davis arrived , Barrett called a council of the officers present to determine whether or not to attack the Regulars at the bridge . In Concord , the majority of the British force was searching for supplies , but they found little . When they decided to burn some wooden gun carriages they discovered , the provincials near the Old North Bridge saw the smoke and thought the British were burning the town . Barrett then made the decision to attack the soldiers holding the bridge . 
 Davis 's company had taken their designated position at the left of the provincial line . This would have placed the Acton company in the rear of the attack when the line advanced . The company in the lead would have been Captain David Brown 's company from Concord . When Barrett asked Brown if he would lead the attack , Brown responded that he would rather not . Knowing that Davis 's company was well equipped with bayonets and cartridge boxes , Barrett asked Davis if his company would lead the advance . Several slight variations of Davis 's response have been recorded . His response is most often given as , " I have not a man that is afraid to go . " Following Barrett 's orders , Davis then moved his company to the right of the line . Around 10 : 30 , the provincials faced to the right and advanced on the Old North Bridge in a column of two men abreast . At the head of the column was Davis , Major John Buttrick of Concord , and Lt. Col. John Robinson of Westford . Barrett remained behind on the hill , cautioning his men as they marched by him not to fire first . The British at the bridge , watching the provincials approach , were surprised to see , as one soldier later said , that they " advanced with the greatest regularity " . 
 When the provincials were within about 75 yards of the bridge , the Regulars fired a few warning shots . Luther Blanchard , the fifer from Acton , was hit and wounded by one of these warning shots . The British then fired a disorganized volley . Isaac Davis was shot through the heart . Private Abner Hosmer of Acton was also killed in this volley . Seeing these casualties , Buttrick commanded , " Fire , fellow soldiers , for God 's sake fire ! " and the provincials returned fire , causing the British to immediately retreat back to Concord . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In February 1851 , shortly after the 75th anniversary of the Battle of Concord , Rev. James Woodbury of Acton petitioned the Massachusetts General Court for funds to build a large monument to Isaac Davis in Acton . After the legislature appropriated $ 2 @,@ 000 for the project , the 75 @-@ foot tall stone obelisk was completed that fall and dedicated on October 29 , 1851 . The remains of Davis , Hosmer , and James Hayward ( an Acton soldier who was killed in Lexington later in the battle ) were moved and re @-@ interred beneath the monument . At the base of the monument is a stone brought from the vicinity of the Old North Bridge in Concord which is , according to an inscription , the stone upon which Davis 's head fell when he was killed . 
 In 1875 , on the centennial of the Battle of Concord , a statue called " The Minute Man " was placed on the approximate site of Isaac Davis 's death . The statue was the first public work of sculptor Daniel Chester French , best known for his 1920 statue , " Abraham Lincoln " , in the Lincoln Memorial . Although commissioned to sculpt a generic provincial soldier , French was inspired by the story of Isaac Davis and modeled the facial features of his statue after photographs of Isaac Davis 's descendants . Davis 's plow , which is currently on display in Acton 's Town Hall , was used as the model for the plow on the statue . 
 On the base of the statue is inscribed the first stanza of Ralph Waldo Emerson 's Concord Hymn written in 1836 : 
 By the rude bridge that arched the flood , Their flag to April 's breeze unfurled , Here once the embattled farmers <unk> fired the shot heard round the world . 
 Representing Davis , the statue of " The Minute Man " with a musket in one hand and the other resting on a plow remains an iconic symbol , and can be found on the Massachusetts state quarter , corporate logos , and the seal of the National Guard of the United States . 
 The route of the Acton Minutemen is retraced every Patriots ' Day in April by today 's recreated company of Acton Minutemen , and by citizens and visitors . Now called the Isaac Davis Trail , the seven mile route from Acton to Concord traverses roads still in use as well as woodland trails . The path was established in 1957 by a group of Acton Boy Scouts who researched the historic route , cleared the portions of the path no longer in use , and placed markers . The trail was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1972 . 
 = Paul Kelly ( Australian musician ) = 
 Paul Maurice Kelly ( born 13 January 1955 ) is an Australian rock music singer @-@ songwriter , guitarist , and harmonica player . He has performed solo , and has led numerous groups , including the Dots , the Coloured Girls , and the Messengers . He has worked with other artists and groups , including associated projects Professor Ratbaggy and Stardust Five . Kelly 's music style has ranged from bluegrass to studio @-@ oriented dub reggae , but his core output straddles folk , rock , and country . His lyrics capture the vastness of the culture and landscape of Australia by chronicling life about him for over 30 years . David Fricke from Rolling Stone calls Kelly " one of the finest songwriters I have ever heard , Australian or otherwise . " Kelly has said , " Song writing is mysterious to me . I still feel like a total beginner . I don 't feel like I have got it nailed yet " . 
 After growing up in Adelaide , Kelly travelled around Australia before settling in Melbourne in 1976 . He became involved in the pub rock scene and drug culture , and recorded two albums with Paul Kelly and the Dots . Kelly moved to Sydney by 1985 , where he formed Paul Kelly and the Coloured Girls . The band was renamed Paul Kelly and the Messengers , initially only for international releases , to avoid possible racist interpretations . At the end of the 1980s , Kelly returned to Melbourne , and in 1991 he disbanded the Messengers . Kelly has been married and divorced twice ; he has three children and resides in St Kilda , a suburb of Melbourne . Dan Kelly , his nephew , is a singer and guitarist in his own right . Dan performed with Kelly on Ways and Means and Stolen Apples . Both were members of Stardust Five , which released a self @-@ titled album in 2006 . On 22 September 2010 Kelly released his memoir , How to Make Gravy , which he described as " it 's not traditional ; it 's writing around the A @-@ Z theme – I tell stories around the song lyrics in alphabetical order " . His biographical film , Paul Kelly : Stories of Me , directed by Ian Darling , was released to cinemas in October 2012 . 
 Kelly 's Top 40 singles include " Billy Baxter " , " Before Too Long " , " Darling It Hurts " , " To Her Door " ( his highest @-@ charting local hit in 1987 ) , " Dumb Things " ( appeared on United States charts in 1988 ) , and " Roll on Summer " . Top @-@ 20 albums include Gossip , Under the Sun , Comedy , Songs from the South ( 1997 compilation , his best @-@ charting album ) , ... Nothing but a Dream , and Stolen Apples . Kelly has won ten Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) Music Awards , including his induction into their Hall of Fame in 1997 . In 2001 the Australasian Performing Rights Association ( APRA ) listed the Top 30 Australian songs of all time , which included Kelly 's " To Her Door " , and " Treaty " , written by Kelly and members of Yothu Yindi . Aside from " Treaty " , Kelly has written or co @-@ written several songs on Indigenous Australian social issues and historical events . He has provided songs for many other artists , tailoring them to their particular vocal range . The album Women at the Well from 2002 had 14 female artists record his songs in tribute . 
 = = Early life = = 
